All Rights Reserved.
and in Great Britain by Chatto & Windus.
Revisions by D.
and in Great Britain by Chatto & Windus.
Revisions by D.
All rights reserved.
All rights reserved.
All rights reserved.
All rights reserved.
All rights reserved.
All rights reserved.
All rights reserved.
Biographical note copyright © 1992 by Random House, Inc.
Revisions to the translation copyright © 1992 by D.
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions.
and in Great Britain by Chatto & Windus.
Revisions by D.
Proust, Marcel, 1871–1922.
[Du côte de chez Swann.
Swann’s way/Marcel Proust; translated by C.
Moncrieff and Terence Kilmartin; revised by D.
— In search of lost time; v.
Translation of: Du côte de chez Swann.
Modern Library website address: www.
In recent years it was officially renamed Illiers-Combray.
A Note on the Revised Translation 1992 by D.
Dear Proust, I’d like you to meet your new readers.
you’d like to know.
What do they say it is?
How should I know?
It’s an expression you might appreciate.
And you’ll have to admit you’re a very deliberate writer.
Readers can read, and stop, and then, another time, resume.
You’re not generally considered pithy.
Who tells it like it is?
Who is the discoursing person?
my body and my heart without disgust!
We call Tolstoy the greatest?
Still, we do not regard Tolstoy as a modern novelist.
of repudiations which is our modernity.
and the symbolism of Baudelaire, Huysmans, Mallarmé, etc.
The other thirty-five?
RICHARD HOWARD is a poet and translator.
Why then should it need revision?
The editors, M.
Pierre Clarac and M.
In particular, MM.
I should like to thank Professor J.
Weightman for his generous help and advice and Mr D.
Enright for his patient and percipient editing.
et affectueuse reconnaissance.
For a long time I would go to bed early.
I would strike a match to look at my watch.
Thank God, it is morning!
The ray of light beneath his door is extinguished.
And nothing could arrest his slow progress.
She would say, At last one can breathe!
Come in and stop your husband drinking brandy!
And yet, as soon as I heard her Bathilde!
Our people were usually limited to M.
Who in the world can it be?
Although a far younger man, M.
You look as solemn as the grave.
Don’t you feel this little breeze?
Are you really a connoisseur at least?
Altogether, my great-aunt treated him with scant ceremony.
I believe you know M.
Sévigné would not have put it better!
My dear, he is so common!
She knows Swann?
But we sat silent.
It must be so very hard for him.
It would be utterly ridiculous.
Now, don’t start whispering!
said my great-aunt.
Swann, cried my father.
Swann, she said, do tell me about your daughter.
Only a mother is capable of understanding these things.
I’m sure that hers would agree with me.
And so we all sat down round the iron table.
We really must have her to dine here one evening.
To be sure!
I met such a clever old gentleman at M.
It’s the most interesting thing I ever heard.
He’s a neighbour of M.
I don’t deny it, answered Swann in some bewilderment.
I don’t know; shall we say Pascal’s Pensées?
In that way we should arrive at a happy medium.
He tried to give his hand to my children.
I noticed it in time to prevent him.
You admire that?
Well, that’s a fine thing, I must say!
But what’s it supposed to mean?
Isn’t one man as good as the next?
Really and truly, it’s abominable.
And you dare to quote it!
Oh, yes: What virtues, Lord, Thou makest us abhor!
How good that is!
I never took my eyes off my mother.
Besides, we’re dining late tonight.
No, no, leave your mother alone.
You’ve said good night to one another, that’s enough.
These exhibitions are absurd.
Go on upstairs.
Besides, that was not all: for surely Mamma would come.
Too often, the kind friend comes down again alone.
he said nothing?
It’s not possible.
You did give him my letter, didn’t you?
Very well, I shall wait a little longer.
What had to move—a leaf of the chestnut-tree, for instance—moved.
Swann had had a second helping of the coffee-and-pistachio ice.
I thought it rather so-so, she was saying.
Next time we shall have to try another flavour.
He is quite antiquated!
It’s the talk of the town.
Why, of course he doesn’t, answered my grandfather.
we never thanked him?
But you did it very prettily, too.
Do you call that thanking him?
shouted my grandfather.
You may be quite sure he never noticed it.
Come, come; Swann isn’t a fool.
I’m sure he understood.
Presently I heard her coming upstairs to close her window.
Then her face assumed an expression of anger.
I will come.
Too late: my father was upon us.
I was not, however.
I don’t need anything.
After all, we aren’t gaolers.
Many years have passed since that night.
Never again will such moments be possible for me.
I ought to have been happy; I was not.
But I had none there.
I had not then read any real novels.
To me it was in reality all dead.
And so it is with our own past.
I had ceased now to feel mediocre, contingent, mortal.
Whence could it have come to me, this all-powerful joy?
Where did it come from?
What did it mean?
How could I seize and apprehend it?
I put down the cup and examine my own mind.
It alone can discover the truth.
More than that: create.
I want to try to make it reappear.
I rediscover the same state, illuminated by no fresh light.
I cannot tell.
And suddenly the memory revealed itself.
Don’t make any mistake.
From the Curé’s, indeed!
No, Mme Octave.
It was Maguelone come to fetch Dr Piperaud.
There must be some child ill.
Oh, dear God!
Françoise, who were they tolling the knell for just now?
Oh dear, of course, it would be for Mme Rousseau.
But I’m wasting your time, my good girl.
I’m just going to see if my fire’s going out.
Are you feeling faint?
Run and get a pennyworth of salt from Camus.
But that must be M.
Oh, that’s a likely story, my poor Françoise.
Do you think I wouldn’t have recognised M.
It beseems I’ve seen her once already this morning.
that’s probably it, my aunt would say.
She must have come over for the holidays.
Yes, that’s it.
That will be it!
You’ll see that the tart was for Mme Goupil.
And it will come in the middle of my lunch!
she would murmur to herself.
she would add.
she would exclaim.
That’s a likely story.
A man you didn’t know from Adam?
Why, of course I knew him, my grandfather would answer.
It was Prosper, Mme Bouillebœuf’s gardener’s brother.
As if I didn’t know Mme Sazerat’s dog!
Well then, it must be the new dog M.
Galopin brought back from Lisieux.
Oh, if that’s what it is!
What, Françoise, more asparagus!
It’s a regular mania for asparagus you’ve got this year.
You’ll make our Parisians sick of it.
No, no, Mme Octave, they like it well enough.
Go and look after your lunch.
It was the steeple that spoke for the church.
Well met, my friends!
he would say as he came towards us.
than her bed and her medicines.
In all this Eulalie excelled.
One could see its red-tiled floor gleaming like porphyry.
And its roof was always crowned with a cooing dove.
He used to entertain them at his house.
Isn’t that his photograph there on your desk?
And his mother your niece, isn’t she?
The image of her, isn’t he?
How like his mother he is, said the lady.
No, thank you, my dear, she said.
I told him that they made you jealous.
Isn’t he your nephew?
How on earth could I have forgotten?
Isn’t he delicious!
Quite a ladies’ man already; he takes after his uncle.
He need only send me a blue’ in the morning?
No, no, it’s impossible, said my uncle, shrugging his shoulders.
He’s kept very busy, he works extremely hard.
Oh, I love artistic people, replied the lady in pink.
There’s no one like them for understanding women.
Apart from a few superior people like yourself.
But please forgive my ignorance.
Who or what is Vaulabelle?
You know you promised to lend them to me.
I’ll take great care of them.
Swann had given me photographs.
Despite all the admiration M.
the gardener would ask, just to draw her.
And he would not have spoken in vain.
Not caring for their lives, is it?
Alas, dear God!
You’re right all the same, they don’t care!
Oh, yes, I can see that, certainly; it’s more straightforward.
de Musset, Esquire.
At first he had been well received there.
Oh, I don’t like the sound of that.
Archers, be on your guard!
Watch without rest, without sound.
Of this timid Israelite?
Yes, I am of the chosen race.
But Bloch had displeased my family for other reasons.
Bloch, is there a change in the weather?
Has it been raining?
I can’t understand it; the barometer was set fair.
As if there could be anything more interesting!
He’s an imbecile.
How can he possibly be sincere, she observed to me.
Why, he doesn’t know me.
Unless he’s mad, of course.
But in the matter of Bergotte he had spoken truly.
These passages in which he delighted were our favourites also.
Legrandin and moreover my remarks on Françoise and M.
What are you reading?
May I look?
Why, it’s Bergotte!
Who has been telling you about him?
I said it was Bloch.
When he has a little beard he’ll be Mahomet himself.
Can you tell me, please, who is his favourite actor?
No, I can’t say.
Have you seen her?
That’s a pity.
You should insist.
I found all this contradictory.
They did not even credit him with talent at all.
They did not do so, because they did not know.
I asked M.
Still, perhaps there has been a second impression.
I’ll find out.
He’s my daughter’s greatest friend.
still amusing yourself with a book?
It isn’t Sunday, you know!
Suddenly my aunt turned pale.
What, three o’clock!
It’s unbelievable how time flies.
There, Françoise, what did I tell you?
How it’s coming down!
Françoise went and returned.
It’s Mme Amédée my grandmother.
She said she was going for a walk.
And yet it’s raining hard.
There’s Benediction over!
Eulalie will never come now, sighed my aunt.
It will be the weather that’s frightened her away.
Only half-past four!
At half-past four!
Only a week before the Rogation-days.
The world is going too far these days.
A bright flush animated my aunt’s cheeks; it was Eulalie.
His reverence don’t wish to disturb Mme Octave.
What is the world coming to!
And the ugliest thing in the whole church, too.
But don’t talk to me about the windows.
Look at Roussainville, the Curé went on.
You may depend upon it, Mme Octave, replied the Curé.
But I don’t see where Saint Hilaire comes in.
Saint Eloi, nothing more nor less!
The lady has become a gentleman.
His Reverence will always have his little joke.
Drains away like a torrent.
Run after her, quick!
But Françoise would return alone, having failed to overtake Eulalie.
The one important thing that I had to ask her.
Have you forgotten that it’s Saturday?
As we were liable, there, to meet M.
Vinteuil in front of the porch.
Its beams had swept away the telegraph office.
He would shrug his shoulders and laugh.
My mother would murmur admiringly You really are wonderful!
Now that I’ve given her a carriage!
gasped my aunt.
But my father had begun to speak.
I’m afraid we are in M.
Isn’t that a fine rendering of a moment like this?
Perhaps you have never read Paul Desjardins.
he suddenly exclaimed, and left us.
Oh, the poor girl!
When the heart is one-and-twenty.
we had definitely to alter our opinion of M.
I listened to M.
His fringed eyelids darkened and drooped.
In a word, he was a snob.
No, I don’t know the Guermantes family.
This is not to say that M.
Legrandin was anything but sincere when he inveighed against snobs.
And do you know anyone at Balbec?
inquired my father.
The places I know well, the people very slightly.
Good gracious, they must be hungry!
What a time to come in!
Well, and so you went the Guermantes way?
But, Léonie, I supposed you knew, Mamma would answer.
Swann’s estate, and the Guermantes way.
We stopped for a moment by the fence.
But to our right the park stretched across level ground.
Gilberte, come along; what are you doing?
You would never have known Tansonville.
And in saying this she was quite sincere.
I did not, however, hear her.
You, you’ve never done me any harm.
So I shall always love you.
People said: That poor M.
That surprises you, does it?
I’m not so sure.
And then he plays music too, with his daughter’s friend.
What are you laughing at?
They play too much music, those people, in my opinion.
I met Papa Vinteuil the other day, by the cemetery.
Anyone who, like ourselves, had seen M.
But for a man of M.
And yet however much M.
But when M.
What a charming man!
What a charming man!
For whenever he met M.
Vinteuil should appear with his daughter at Tansonville.
We would take refuge among the trees.
How French that church was!
But what mattered rain or storm?
Good to be out walking!
In vain did I call upon it now.
It can only come to him from her.
Presently her friend came into the room.
Leave them open, said her friend.
But it’s too tiresome!
People will see us, Mlle Vinteuil answered.
said her friend sarcastically.
And what if they are?
And what if they are?
All the better that they should see us.
Mlle Vinteuil shuddered and rose to her feet.
You aren’t too hot?
You don’t want to sit and read by yourself?
I remembered the words that M.
He can’t bother us any longer.
she said, taking up the photograph.
You wouldn’t dare.
Not dare to spit on it?
said the friend with studied brutality.
And yet I have since reflected that if M.
Presently the course of the Vivonne became choked with water-plants.
In the holiday sky an idle cloud languorously dawdled.
It was time for our picnic.
You’ll be able to see her in church.
My disappointment was immense.
So that’s Mme de Guermantes—that’s all she is!
What true nobility!
We resumed our journey.
There was never any programme for the evening’s entertainment.
Verdurin used to say: We’re all friends here.
Liberty Hall, you know!
Then you want me to have one of my headaches?
I know what I’m in for.
Tomorrow, when I want to get up—nothing doing!
To be eaten alive by fleas and vermin!
A fine lot of good that will do you!
And so when, that year, the demi-mondaine told M.
Verdurin carried the request at once to his wife.
What do you say?
Be quiet; no one asked your opinion.
I tell you you’re an angel.
Very well; bring your friend, if he’s nice.
What is this mystery?
It’s better to close one’s eyes.
Do you still see as much of him as ever?
Suddenly, and without any warning, he ceased to appear.
Don’t you remember, it’s his American’s night at the Opera?
I should be like the frog in the fable!
You’re afraid of affection?
Some woman must have made you suffer.
And you think that the rest are all like her.
She can’t have understood you: you’re such an exceptional person.
Why, I never have anything to do.
Will you do that?
A nice lot of people!
But you expressed a wish that I should come.
And your wish is my command.
They say she sets the house on fire.
That’s an odd expression, isn’t it?
I never dared to mention it, M.
Verdurin had answered, but I’ve noticed the same thing myself.
Swann that evening, Swann!
And seeing that no one answered him, Swann!
Who on earth is Swann?
Nothing amuses me more than match-making, he confided to Cottard.
I’ve brought off quite a few, even between women!
In asking to be introduced to M.
Verdurin, who, however, was rather put out.
She’s such an excellent woman!
I’m sure she can, Swann hastened to concede.
For instance, said M.
Verdurin, now this will surprise you: she writes quite delightfully.
You’ve never heard her nephew play?
It’s admirable, eh, Doctor?
A joy for ever!
Verdurin could not help laughing.
What are all those good people laughing at over there?
I won’t have him tormented.
But why on earth should it bother him?
I’m sure M.
He’s going to play us the pianoforte arrangement.
No, no, no, not my sonata!
Thanks very much, I don’t intend to repeat that performance.
Well, all right, then, said M.
Verdurin, he can play just the andante.
Just the andante!
That really is a bit rich!
cried his wife.
The Master is really too priceless!
And if you are ill, we’ll look after you.
Will you really?
Go along and sit by Odette.
You can make room for M.
Swann there, can’t you, Odette?
What charming Beauvais!
They’ve never made anything else like it.
And these little chairs, too, are perfect marvels.
You can look at them in a moment.
Isn’t it well drawn?
What do you say?
I think they knew a thing or two about drawing!
Doesn’t it make your mouth water, that vine?
What are you all laughing at now, pray?
Isn’t it an exquisite patina?
Be quiet, you wretch!
But, my dear, I’ve said absolutely nothing.
Look here, Doctor, I call you as a witness.
Did I utter a word?
Come along; you can caress them later.
You’ll like that, I think.
Here’s the young gentleman who will take charge of that.
Then it vanished.
And so, at last, he ceased to think of it.
Isn’t he a charmer?
Though it’s better, really, than an orchestra, more complete.
he exclaimed with sudden determination.
Perhaps he’s the man, cried Mme Verdurin.
Then to entertain the idea is to settle it?
the doctor suggested.
But it may well be some relation, Swann went on.
cried Mme Verdurin, Do people still call in Potain?
At least you don’t kill your patients!
Smarter, is it?
said Mme Verdurin.
So there are fashions, nowadays, in illness, are there?
she screamed suddenly, burying her face in her hands.
As for M.
He’s so unaffected, quite charming.
Perhaps you might call for him?
No, he doesn’t want that.
Oh, very well; just as you like.
Provided he doesn’t fail us at the last moment.
Greatly to Mme Verdurin’s surprise, he never failed them.
You shall have it in time for the Danicheff revival.
Dr Cottard roared in a voice of thunder.
Yes, at M.
Are you often taken like that?
the painter asked Cottard with mock-seriousness.
What’s that you say?
You know M.
Upon my word!
Then it can’t be much fun for you, going there.
Swann here this evening?
He’s a personal friend of M.
I suppose that means he’s what you’d call a gentleman’?
As for M.
But what about Mme Verdurin?
Oh, that’s quite simple.
There’s always some excuse.
How sweet of you.
Why do you want the rest?
she had asked him.
Our little bit; that’s all we need.
But he never went into her house.
She poured out Swann’s tea, inquired Lemon or cream?
Swann had left his cigarette-case at her house.
If only, she wrote, you had also forgotten your heart!
I should never have let you have that back.
The words Florentine painting were invaluable to Swann.
He would try to distinguish Odette’s silhouette.
Verdurin said to the painter: Hm.
Seems to be warming up.
Verdurin asked his wife.
I think we may say that he’s hooked.
The face he pulled?
Swann has been here?
Just for a moment.
We had a glimpse of a Swann tremendously agitated.
In a state of nerves.
You see, Odette had left.
Come, come, come!
We haven’t been there to see, have we now?
She would have told me, answered Mme Verdurin with dignity.
I may say that she tells me everything.
And yet it’s just what she needs.
I beg to differ from you, M.
Verdurin courteously interrupted.
I don’t entirely care for the gentleman.
I feel he puts on airs.
Verdurin went on sarcastically.
But that doesn’t prevent her from being sweet.
but Remind me, tomorrow, to order in some more firewood.
I’m sure we must be running short.
We must find the lady.
It’s most important.
It’s all right, he assured her, don’t be frightened.
The jolt has disarranged them.
You’ll get out of breath again.
You can easily answer in signs; I shall understand.
Really and truly now, you don’t mind my doing this?
That’s not too hard?
I’m not hurting you, am I?
Perhaps I’m tickling you a bit?
I don’t believe I ever smelt any before.
Tell the truth, now.
I think, though, that this one isn’t quite straight.
Or else, if she had none: Oh!
It was spring, and the nights were clear and frosty.
Every kiss provokes another.
I can’t do everything at once.
He fully realised that she was not intelligent.
she was properly taken in!
Then she would interrupt sharply: More in it?
Do tell me!
You’re always so reserved; I can’t make you out.
But surely, Swann objected, not everyone knew your friend.
Could Odette’s be one of these?
I should have loved to go!
You know what a braggart I am!
A marquise, her!
She wants to be admired, does she?
Very well, we’ll take her there, we can but obey.
How nice you look with it!
Every inch a gentleman.
All you want now is a title!
she concluded with a tinge of regret.
What a charming atmosphere!
he said to himself.
How entirely genuine is the life these people lead!
Swann home, won’t you?
You ask me whether Mme Verdurin is really intelligent.
Without question, she has a profound understanding of art.
And yet, when M.
But the real, the fundamental reason was quite different.
Early in the course of the dinner, when M.
Blanche of Castile?
What do you make of a scientist like that?
she asked Forcheville.
she went on, turning to the doctor.
Am I not right, Madame?
Yes, indeed, my dear host, yes indeed, yes indeed!
Who is that gentleman?
Forcheville asked Mme Verdurin.
He seems first-rate.
Why, he’s celebrated all over Europe.
Oh, that’s Bréchot, is it?
exclaimed Forcheville, who had not quite caught the name.
It’s always interesting to dine with prominent people.
No dull evenings in this house, I’m sure.
Now Brichot, this evening, is nothing.
That’s strange, remarked Forcheville with fitting astonishment.
The whole table burst out laughing.
What did I tell you?
said Mme Verdurin to Forcheville.
It’s simply impossible to be serious with him.
But she observed that Swann alone had not unbent.
I stuck my nose into it.
Well, it’s just not true!
And one makes twelve!
It’s all there—but really, I swear it.
You know he talks well.
No, really, I’m not joking!
protested the painter, enchanted by the success of his speech.
But we don’t suppose for a moment that you’re exaggerating.
Wait a little; don’t serve the salad just yet.
It’s not a Japanese salad, is it?
she said in a loud undertone, turning towards Odette.
Who is that lady?
She seems devilish clever, said Forcheville.
No, it is not.
Dumas says you’re to in the play.
Now, Serge Panine!
Really, and what don’t you like about them?
Are you sure you aren’t prejudiced?
Perhaps you think he’s a little too sad.
She was interrupted by Forcheville addressing Swann.
I’ve seldom come across anything like it.
He’d make a first-rate preacher.
By Jove, I wish I was like that.
What with him and M.
It comes more naturally with him, it’s less studied.
Do you see much of M.
asked Mme Verdurin.
Oh dear, no!
Isn’t that so, Swann?
I never see anything of you, do I?
then, where on earth is one to see him?
We shan’t repeat it to them, you may be sure.
They’re charming people.
It all depends on what you call intelligence.
Forcheville felt that it was his turn to be brilliant.
Come now, Swann, tell us what you mean by intelligence.
Oh, but … protested Swann.
Oh, but nonsense!
asked the doctor.
Just listen to this!
Mme Verdurin rallied Forcheville and the doctor.
He’s going to give us Fénelon’s definition of intelligence.
It’s not often you get a chance of hearing that!
You see, it’s just the same as with me!
said Odette peevishly.
After dinner, Forcheville went up to the doctor.
Of course she’s getting a bit broad in the beam.
But Mme de Crécy!
There’s a little woman who knows what’s what, all right.
We’re speaking of Mme de Crécy, he explained, as M.
Verdurin joined them, his pipe in his mouth.
Forcheville knew and saw the joke, and was thoroughly amused.
As for M.
Verdurin’s cough began all over again.
Do take your pipe out of your mouth.
de Forcheville thinks Odette charming, M.
Verdurin told his wife.
He spoils everything, don’t you know.
Weren’t there some Putbuses in the Crusades?
I’m treating her for rheumatoid arthritis; she’s a charming woman.
Mme Verdurin knows her too, I believe.
Swann, said the pianist.
What the devil’s that?
Not the sonata-snake, I hope!
de Forcheville, hoping to create an effect.
de Forcheville had made a mistake.
He dashed in boldly to correct him: No, no.
The word isn’t serpent-à-sonates, it’s serpent-à-sonnettes!
Forcheville explained the joke to him.
The doctor blushed.
You’ll admit it’s not bad, eh, Doctor?
I’ve known it for ages.
you’ve come too late!
We’ve been having a simply incomparable Brichot!
You never heard such eloquence!
But he’s gone.
Isn’t that so, M.
Wasn’t he delicious, our Brichot?
Swann bowed politely.
You weren’t interested?
she asked dryly.
Oh, but I assure you, I was quite enthralled.
The party broke up very late.
What exactly is your Mme Verdurin?
A bit of a demirep, eh?
I don’t mind saying that I thought him extremely stupid.
Verdurin took it up: He’s not sincere.
What a difference between him and Forcheville.
Either you agree with him or you don’t.
Didn’t I say so?
retorted her husband.
The air was warm; it was beautiful spring weather.
I must say it’s pretty cool of him.
No cattleya, then, tonight?
Can’t you see I’m not well?
He looked at his watch.
He raised himself on tiptoe.
He could not be certain of the voice.
He knocked once again.
The window first, then the shutters were thrown open.
I wanted to know if you were feeling better.
He looked up.
It was after dinner at the Verdurins’.
Did you see how pathetic he looked?
He could see that the neighbours were staring at him.
After waiting for an hour, he returned.
She had, of course, heard him knocking at the window.
At that moment, he heard the front-door bell ring.
He kept it in his hand.
They consisted of a stiffly formal ending.
To open the door!
After that he read the whole letter.
I should never have let you have that back.
But Swann was incapable of inventing his sufferings.
From without, however, everything brought him fresh suffering.
At last the carriages were ordered.
Mme Verdurin said to Swann: Good-bye, then.
and Mme Verdurin invited Forcheville into their carriage.
Yes, Madame, said Odette meekly.
Very well, you can write it to her instead.
Good-bye, said Odette, holding out her hand.
He tried hard to smile, but looked utterly dejected.
Mme Verdurin asked her husband when they had reached home.
It’s positively indecent!
I can’t conceive how Odette can stand such manners.
He literally seems to be saying, You belong to me!
Imagine going to Chatou!
Like a lot of drapers after shutting up shop!
The Cottards would be there; possibly Brichot.
What fetid humour!
de Forcheville, there, can’t you, Odette?
…  In the dark!
 he remembered the painter’s words filthy old procuress!
What a name!
Swann this evening?
I sincerely trust we shan’t!
cried Mme Verdurin.
You see, your Nuit de Cléopâtre what a title!
has no bearing on the point.
Meanwhile, Odette had shown signs of increasing emotion and uncertainty.
You really are far less intelligent than I supposed!
Anyhow, I’ll take full responsibility.
If this attempt failed, M.
More than that, the authority, the right to join her.
So, I’m not allowed to travel any more!
Swann imagined himself already down there with M.
We mustn’t on any account, he would warn M.
de Forestelle, run across Odette and the Verdurins.
And when M.
You see, Odette is there.
The front-door bell rang.
It was only a servant coming in.
It was also, however, sufficient.
Given that, everything Odette said appeared to him suspect.
That depends on this gentleman.
You must ask him.
What a lazy-bones!
At such times Swann detested her.
But I’ve been a fool, too, he would argue.
I’m paying for other men’s pleasures with my money.
Let’s hope she’ll refuse.
The very next day, he did.
But she was never that for very long.
began to fade and dissolve.
if you only knew the creature as I know him!
What distress he must have caused her!
He was full of remorse for having treated her harshly.
It’s an odd thing, but I actually thought her ugly.
He would say to himself, almost with astonishment, It’s she!
And, failing an excuse, he would ask M.
But you know, also, what life is in Paris.
And I thought I was being so nice to you.
Well, I shall know better another time!
He was quite happy whenever M.
de Charlus was with Odette.
He knew that between M.
de Charlus should be free to accompany her.
Surely you went somewhere else first?
How very funny!
It was her idea, I suppose?
She never spoke to a soul?
I can just picture you.
What a nice fellow you are, my dear Mémé.
I’m exceedingly fond of you.
Swann was relieved.
He fancied that he was cured.
But it had not stirred from its place.
There’s no point in asking her to come.
If only she would invite him there with Odette.
She had been attracted to Swann then.
won’t you ever be like other people!
That evening, talking to M.
that isn’t Loredan on the box?
Good heavens, no!
What on earth is one to do?
Women, you know, women.
My dear fellow, she’d be furious.
You know what an excellent influence you have over her.
In any case, you’ll find her at home before then.
Hallo, you here!
But that of M.
Meanwhile, behind him, M.
Mme de Cambremer cast a furtive glance behind her.
The Princesse des Laumes felt them too.
This lady was now dead.
And she murmured How charming it is!
A movement of Mme Franquetot’s head disclosed the Princess.
And she went on laughing.
I should like to have your opinion of it.
But I know that quintet quite well.
I can tell you now—that I adore it.
Listen, and I’ll explain, she said to Mme de Gallardon.
Tell me, have you seen your friend M.
my beloved Charles!
I never knew he was here.
I must catch his eye.
I can throw no light at all on the matter.
My dear Princess, you here?
What, you’ve been here for quite a time?
Oh, please, no!
Why should you?
I don’t mind in the least where I sit.
It will make me keep my back straight.
Did you see what that girl did just now, Princess?
Odd, wasn’t it?
Is she one of the performers?
They must be country cousins’!
Universal providers,’ you know.
You must admit they’re rather splendid, General.
It isn’t possible!
You think not, eh!
Don’t you agree with me, Princess?
She thrusts herself forward too much.
And then, seeing that M.
Basin knows them, and is deeply attached to them.
I’ve no reason to object.
Anyhow, it isn’t that at all.
Can you imagine it, all their furniture is Empire’!
She assumed a tone of childish gravity.
Why, I might get a most hostile reception.
How can you tell?
Perhaps they might find it extremely disagreeable.
I feel sure I should keep him for grand receptions.
I never could make out why.
Do you really know any others who have it?
Ask him to introduce you.
But hurry up, he seems to be just going!
Did you notice how dreadfully ill he’s looking?
asked the General.
My precious Charles?
Ah, he’s coming at last.
It’s very pretty indeed, my dear Princess.
The Princess came up on purpose from Guermantes?
But that’s too wonderful!
The musicians didn’t tell me, even.
But you are yourself, Princess!
Why, they must have countries’ everywhere, those people!
Don’t I wish I had!
No, not the Cambremers; her own people.
She was a Legrandin, and used to come to Combray.
But surely these Cambremers have rather a startling name.
It ends just in time, but it ends badly!
she said with a laugh.
It begins no better.
Swann took the point.
Yes; that double abbreviation!
Do you agree that life is a dreadful business.
Which was probably not true.
Yes, life is a dreadful business!
We must meet more often, my dear friend.
We might spend an evening together.
By all means.
Why not come down to Guermantes?
My mother-in-law would be wild with joy.
Yes, I know, it’s delightful!
Anyhow, I’m going.
Having told M.
Oh, yes, of course, La Pérouse, said the General.
It’s quite a well-known name.
There’s a street called that.
Do you know anyone in the Rue La Pérouse?
asked Swann excitedly.
She gave a most amusing theatre-party the other evening.
Oh, so she lives in the Rue La Pérouse.
It’s attractive, a delightful street, so gloomy.
Not at all.
When Swann did finally introduce M.
It’s written from the Hôtel Vouillemont.
What on earth can she have gone there for?
What happened there?
It was himself.
Had it not often been the witness of their joys?
It means nothing.
What could his life have been?
Vinteuil had been one of those musicians.
This was what Vinteuil had done with the little phrase.
The phrase had disappeared.
But no one, as it happened, dreamed of speaking.
He had often thought of going.
One is never as unhappy as one thinks.
He’s going to Egypt!
He wondered who it could be.
de Charlus, or of M.
des Laumes, or of M.
des Laumes was a trifle hard, but sound and straightforward.
As for M.
After all, though M.
Really, that kind of man was the worst of all.
Swann regretted not having formed attachments only to such people.
To have a kind heart was everything, and M.
de Charlus had one.
Yes, but what of the disreputable life he led?
He may have acted dishonourably once again.
He also suspected my grandfather.
What criterion ought one to adopt to judge one’s fellows?
Must he then cease to see them all?
I know how to melt you, all right.
You’re not made of marble.
After all, in the case of M.
He went to see Odette.
He sat down at a distance from her.
He sat there silent, watching their love expire.
Suddenly he made up his mind.
or Will you be at the review?
I’ve told you, no.
You know quite well, she added, seeming angry and uncomfortable.
Yes, I know, but are you quite sure?
Swann knew that Odette would never perjure herself on that.
Haven’t you had enough?
What’s the matter with you today?
You seem determined to make me hate you.
How on earth do I know?
she exclaimed angrily.
Swann had prepared himself for every possibility.
To ensure that, he must watch over Odette.
Already he had begun to put further questions.
My darling, he began again, it’s all over now.
Was it with anyone I know?
No, I swear it wasn’t.
He smiled, and went on: Just as you like.
What is really terrible is what one can’t imagine.
I’ve quite finished now.
Only one word more: how long ago?
Oh, Charles, can’t you see you’re killing me?
It’s all so long ago.
I’ve never given it a thought.
A lot of good that would do you!
she concluded, with unconscious stupidity but intentional malice.
It’s only natural.
Did it happen here?
But I don’t know; really, I don’t.
I’ve heard that tale before,’ I said to her.
I knew quite well what she was after.
You’re a fiend!
Without being intelligent, Odette had the charm of naturalness.
But he could not confine himself to these detached observations.
Two or three times.
I’ve heard that tale before.
He did not hold it against her.
She was only half to blame.
What kind of life has she led?
All one’s future happiness lies in the answer.
He marvelled at the terrible re-creative power of his memory.
It’s just the way I feel.
I know you’d have been pleased, my darling.
For her admissions never exactly coincided with his doubts.
And these admissions he could never forget.
And they poisoned it.
you knew him as long ago as that?
She swore that she had not.
It’s quite true, I hadn’t been to the Maison Dorée.
I was coming away from Forcheville’s.
But someone else came to see him.
It was rather nice of me, really, don’t you see?
There’s always some excuse.
There’s always some excuse.
asked Swann anxiously.
Why, of course!
It all depends on people’s characters!
And you too, you’ve got blue cuffs on.
I’m not boring you, am I; or keeping you?
No, I’m not in a hurry.
If you’d have bored me I’d have said so.
But I like hearing you talk.
I’m very flattered … Aren’t we having a nice chat?
he asked the bawd who had just looked in.
But there it is!
People come to my house now just to talk.
But presently he rose and said good-bye to her.
She had ceased to interest him.
She did not know Odette.
The painter having been ill, Dr Cottard recommended a sea-voyage.
Several of the faithful spoke of accompanying him.
And the painter came home with them.
I needn’t ask you, M.
Well and what do you think of it?
Oh, that’s quite all right!
At least you admit it frankly.
I find that most commendable.
Well now, I have seen it.
There’s something to look forward to!
We talked about you all the time.
And you can imagine that it’s never unfavourably.
What, you don’t believe me!
she went on, noticing that Swann looked sceptical.
There’s no one like him for that.
I do hope he’s doing a little work!
Forgive me, won’t you.
Indeed, she made a remark which I found absolutely charming.
Oh, mercy, there’s the conductor stopping for me.
He was mistaken.
They had obviously arranged it between them, he added.
She is his mistress.
The strange young man burst into tears.
Swann tried to console him.
I’ve advised her to do it dozens of times.
Why be so distressed?
He was obviously the man to understand her.
It was they who started the fire.
Sir, it’s eight o’clock, and the barber is here.
I’ve told him to call again in an hour.
He touched his cheek.
It was dry.
He rose and dressed himself.
Going to the Champs-Elysées I found unendurable.
But would she come back to the Champs-Elysées?
I hope Mamma will let me go to my friend’s.
Why shouldn’t Gilberte do the same as that lady?
But the weather would cloud over.
It remained dark.
The balcony in front of the window was grey.
Brief, fading ivy, climbing, fugitive flora!
I am sorry to give you so much trouble!
We’re two brave souls!
And the old lady began to laugh herself.
It did, however, make some progress.
I purchased two ha’penny marbles.
They had the transparency and mellowness of life itself.
Keep it as a souvenir.
It’s too silly not to.
She’s going soon.
Swann was coming to fetch his daughter.
Swann, who came a little later to fetch his daughter.
And no sooner have you come than you go away!
I’ve got a big tea-party.
Perhaps they’ll take me to the Riviera—wouldn’t that be nice?
though I should miss the Christmas-tree here.
Good-bye—there’s Papa calling me.
I could scarcely drag my legs along.
It’s like as if everything’s topsyturvy up there too.
Suddenly I would stop in alarm.
Then, one and all, they took on a meaning.
It will not alter now.
There’s nothing wonderful about it.
your poor grandfather would have said.
So she’s the one you find so beautiful!
Why, she’s perfectly horrible, and always has been.
She’s the widow of a bailiff.
But she must always be forcing herself upon strangers.
Did you speak to him?
It was he who came up and spoke to me.
I hadn’t seen him.
Then you haven’t quarrelled?
What on earth makes you think we’ve quarrelled?
Has he ever asked me to his?
I don’t know his wife.
But he often used to come at Combray.
But these ornaments I alone had eyes to see.
It seems she’s got great faith in medals.
she’s a most religious lady, she is!
Françoise would say: What’s wrong with you now?
to another: How I should have loved to!
It was bad luck!
to a third: Yes, if you like!
But do you suppose that I care what you say?
They would ask one another, Who is she?
You know who that is?
That conveys nothing to you?
Odette de Crécy, then?
Odette de Crécy!
Why, I thought as much.
I shouldn’t remind her of it, if I were you.
But she still looks superb.
Oh, but you should have known her then.
How pretty she was!
It was also the time of day.
I walked towards the Allée des Acacias.
They went out bare-headed.
I exclaimed to myself.
I wanted to find them again as I remembered them.
The sun had gone.
The reality that I had known no longer existed.
2 O ciel, que de vertus vous nous faites haïr.
From Corneille’s Mort de Pompée.
3 à contre-coeur: reluctantly.
5 bleu: express letter transmitted by pneumatic tube in Paris.
Que ces vains ornements, que ces voiles me pèsent!
A pris soin sur mon front d’assembler mes cheveux?
8 In English in the original.
Odette’s speech is peppered with English expressions.
12 Serpent à sonnettes means rattlesnake.
15 Pneumatique or petit bleu: see note above.
Bedrooms of the past, at Combray, at Tansonville, at Balbec.
Bedtime at Combray.
The magic lantern; Geneviève de Brabant.
The little closet smelling of orris-root.
The good-night kiss.
Visits from Swann; his father; his unsuspected social life.
Our social personality is a creation of other people’s thoughts.
Aunts Céline and Flora.
Swann and I.
My grandmother’s presents; her ideas about books.
A reading of George Sand.
Resurrection of Combray through involuntary memory.
The madeleine dipped in a cup of tea.
Aunt Léonie’s two rooms; her lime-tea.
Uncle Adolphe’s sanctum.
Love of the theatre: titles on posters.
Meeting with the lady in pink.
My family quarrel with Uncle Adolphe.
The kitchen-maid: Giotto’s Charity.
Reading in the garden.
The gardener’s daughter and the passing cavalry.
Bloch and Bergotte.
Bloch and my family.
Swann’s friendship with Bergotte.
Swann’s mannerisms of speech and attitudes of mind.
Prestige of Mlle Swann as a friend of Bergotte’s.
The Curé’s visits to Aunt Léonie.
Eulalie and Françoise.
The kitchen-maid’s confinement.
Aunt Léonie’s nightmare.
The hawthorns on the altar in Combray church.
His boyish-looking daughter.
Walks round Combray by moonlight.
Aunt Léonie and Louis XIV.
Strange behaviour of M.
Plan for a holiday at Balbec.
Swann’s or the Méséglise way and the Guermantes way.
View over the plain.
The lilacs of Tansonville.
The hawthorn lane.
Apparition of Gilberte.
Dawn of love for Gilberte: glamour of the name Swann.
Farewell to the hawthorns.
Mlle Vinteuil’s friend comes to Montjouvain.
The porch of Saint-André-des-Champs, Françoise and Théodore.
Death of Aunt Léonie; Françoise’s wild grief.
Exultation in the solitude of autumn.
Disharmony between our feelings and their habitual expression.
The same emotions do not spring up simultaneously in everyone.
Stirrings of desire.
The little closet smelling of orris-root.
Scene of sadism at Montjouvain.
The Guermantes Way.
River landscape: the Vivonne; the water-lilies.
Daydreams and discouragement of a future writer.
The secrets hidden behind shapes, scents and colours.
The steeples of Martinville; first joyful experience of literary creation.
Transition from joy to sadness.
Does reality take shape in the memory alone?
The Verdurins and their little clan.
Odette mentions Swann to the Verdurins.
Swann and women.
Swann’s first meeting with Odette: she is not his type.
How he comes to fall in love with her.
The sonata in F sharp.
The Beauvais settee.
The little phrase.
The Vinteuil of the sonata and the Vinteuil of Combray.
Mme Verdurin finds Swann charming at first.
But his powerful friendships make a bad impression on her.
Vinteuil’s little phrase, the national anthem of their love.
Tea with Odette; her chrysanthemums.
Odette, a Florentine painting.
Love letter from Odette written from the Maison Dorée.
The cattleyas; she becomes his mistress.
Odette’s vulgarity; her idea of chic.
A dinner at the Verdurins’: Brichot, Cottard, the painter, Saniette.
The little phrase.
Forcheville’s cowardly attack on Saniette, and Odette’s smile of complicity.
Signs of distress that accompany Odette’s lying.
The Verdurins organise an excursion to Chatou without Swann.
His indignation with them.
Should he go to Dreux or Pierrefonds to find Odette?
Waiting through the night.
Peaceful evenings at Odette’s with Forcheville.
Recrudescence of anguish.
The Bayreuth project.
Love and death and the mystery of personality.
Charles Swann and young Swann.
Swann, Odette, Charlus and Uncle Adolphe.
Longing for death.
An evening at the Marquise de Saint-Euverte’s.
Arrival of the Princesse des Laumes; her conversation with Swann.
The language of music.
Swann realises that Odette’s love for him will never revive.
The whole past shattered stone by stone.
Bellini’s Mahomet II.
An anonymous letter.
Les Filles de Marbre.
Odette and women.
Impossibility of ever possessing another person.
On the Ile du Bois, by moonlight.
A new circle of hell.
The terrible re-creative power of memory.
Odette and procuresses.
Odette’s suspect effusions.
Charming conversation in a brothel.
Odette goes on a cruise with the faithful.
Mme Cottard assures Swann that Odette adores him.
Return of his jealousy in a nightmare.
Dreams of place-names.
Rooms at Combray.
Room in the Grand Hotel at Balbec.
The real Balbec and the Balbec of dream.
Dreams of spring in Florence.
Words and names.
Names of Norman towns.
Abortive plan to visit Florence and Venice.
In the Champs-Elysées.
A little girl with red hair; the name Gilberte.
Games of prisoner’s base.
What will the weather be like?
Snow in the Champs-Elysées.
The reader of the Débats Mme Blatin.
A spring day in winter: joy and disappointment.
The name Swann.
Swann meets my mother in the Trois Quartiers.
Pilgrimage with Françoise to the Swanns’ house near the Bois.
The Bois, Garden of Woman.
Mme Swann in the Bois.
Memory and reality.
REVISED BY D.
Copyright © 1992 by Random House, Inc.
and Random House, Inc.
Random House, Inc.
Chatto & Windus.
a Budding Grove by C.
published in the United States by Random House, Inc.
Great Britain by Chatto & Windus.
Revisions by D.
The Modern Library in 1930.
Jacket portrait courtesy of Archive Photos.
© Copyright 2000 Versaware Inc.
and its licensors.
All rights reserved.
All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners.
In this new position he revealed himself a different man.
What charitable friend counselled that glacial air?
Who, finally, was the Marquis de Norpois?
And they knew also that, in calling upon M.
But in the case of M.
Ribot and M.
My father was himself more astonished than anyone.
My father knew that M.
I keep them.
In a word, I suppose that my mother considered M.
de Norpois were extremely modern—but of idiom.
The evening on which M.
But it was because M.
to my father, who replied angrily What!
So now it’s you who don’t want him to go!
But suddenly everything was altered.
The doors will be closed at two o’clock.
that first matinée was to prove a bitter disappointment.
My mother had not forgotten.
Madame told me especially that it must be Nev’-York.
But a second actress now responded to the first.
But how short their duration was!
I put the glasses down.
I call that acting, don’t you?
It’s all gold, look!
Fine, ain’t it?
And certainly, he’s had no reason to regret it.
Tell him I sent you.
de Norpois with regard to a number of investments.
With absolutely first-class securities such as those, said M.
The sight of them enchanted me.
But it was not destined to captivate M.
It was not in itself a very remarkable ending.
Well, did you enjoy your matinée?
de Norpois a good opinion of me.
He has just been to see Berma.
But I soon set his mind at rest.
You were charmed with her, of course?
But what were they?
If she is frightfully good, what more do you want?
She hardly ever appears in anything trivial.
No loud colours, no rant.
No, I have not been disappointed!
You have a first-rate cook, Madame, said M.
de Norpois, and that is no small matter.
But I must confess that he far surpassed my expectations.
Still, it needed saying.
For my part, I thoroughly applaud it.
Your friend M.
Besides, who could help knowing him?
His is a heart of crystal.
de Norpois detached this word with sharp emphasis.
After launching this quotation M.
de Norpois to the Académie des Sciences Morales.
In short, M.
One thing, however, M.
Nine times out of ten they are most dangerous.
I’m delighted for his sake.
Why yes, it’s an idea that greatly appeals to me.
Balbec is quite charming.
I was down that way a few years ago.
But may I ask what made you choose Balbec?
But Balbec church is partly Romanesque, is it not?
asked my father.
I couldn’t go.
de Norpois as to whom he had met there.
Anyhow, they appear to be quite content as they are.
He kept on repeating, We haven’t a free evening!
A Nesselrode pudding!
The marriage—so much is certain—was not well received.
A hundred times no!
All the same, I don’t think Swann is unhappy.
Instead of which, just the opposite has happened.
This alteration was perhaps not so extraordinary as M.
de Norpois professed to find it.
Everyone does as he thinks fit.
A consultant more discerning than M.
She urged him to give them a more prominent place.
That would not have been seemly.
inquired my father.
And what was your own impression, Your Excellency?
my mother asked, from politeness as well as from curiosity.
She is altogether charming!
Yes, Bergotte was there, replied M.
Do you know him?
No action—or very little—but above all no range.
That is putting the cart before the horse.
Masterpieces are not so common as all that!
Shattered by what M.
de Norpois had of a sudden enclosed and sealed it.
Indeed that is his sole excuse.
And was Mme Swann’s daughter at the dinner?
I asked M.
so that’s it?
But I assure you, I too thought her charming.
Oh, Monsieur, I assured M.
So she would never discover that I knew M.
He’s no longer a child.
So it is with Time in one’s life.
He has finally decided to end his days there.
Not at all!
answered my mother.
I dare say.
Yes, that was it.
I noticed it at the time; it was very shrewd.
Why, their voices are even louder.
Françoise received the compliments of M.
Do you mean Henry’s?
Oh, dear no!
said Françoise with a mildness which cloaked a profound contempt.
I meant a little restaurant.
Oh, no, Monsieur, I meant a good restaurant.
Monde meant for Françoise the demi-monde.
they need them to fetch the boys in.
It’s a place of some consequence, too.
Plenty of custom there.
Oh, they raked in the coppers, there, all right.
A moist and gentle breeze was blowing.
I returned home.
Meanwhile Gilberte never came to the Champs-Elysées.
She agreed to do so.
de Norpois, met with no more success.
Françoise thought her a proper lady.
I went and sat down beside her.
Here, she went on, don’t go away without your letter.
Presently I began to feel better.
Give me a pen.
Now remember, milk!
After that, you’ll gradually return to your normal life.
But whenever there’s any coughing or choking—purges, enemas, bed, milk!
And we realised that this imbecile was a great physician.
At last I was able to get up.
If you could just see yourself!
You look like death!
I decided provisionally that it was social and professional.
With all my kindest regards.
Then at last I was conscious of my happiness.
Like them these obstacles remain mysterious but are temporary.
Only they last, as a rule, longer than love itself.
And thus it came about that whereas M.
At such moments Gilberte’s plaits used to brush my cheek.
Does Gilberte know you’re here?
Then I’ll leave you to her.
I’ve been in one of them.
I feel as if I could eat something.
What do you say?
Alas, its paralysis was but momentary.
But that time was still remote.
Meanwhile Gilberte was making my tea.
Some of them even refused tea!
Goodness, how stupid servants are!
But, Mamma, do!
We invite you, Gilberte would answer.
Thank you, no, my precious; what would my visitors say?
I really think I’ve earned a little rest.
When can you come?
You are horrid!
At once my opinion of Françoise was diametrically changed.
or Mme Swann was at home.
or Do admit, it’s a very good story!
Do you know if your mother is alone, Gilberte?
No, Papa, she still has some visitors.
At seven o’clock!
The poor woman must be absolutely broken.
and Mme Swann made it short, as in odd.
Just think of it; ever since two o’clock this afternoon!
he went on, turning to me.
Did I say a dozen?
I believe he told me fourteen.
No, a dozen; I don’t remember.
And are there a lot of them in there still?
No; only two.
Who are they, do you know?
Mme Cottard and Mme Bontemps.
How should I know?
Is that supposed to mean a lot, being Permanent Secretary?
I should think it did mean a lot’!
He’s an Officer of the Legion of Honour.
A delightful man, and very good-looking too.
they’ve had to get it back as best they could.
She is amazing, this daughter of mine.
She knows everyone.
I don’t know her.
You are quite wrong; she’s charming, pretty, intelligent.
She’s even quite witty.
How could he possibly describe her as attractive?
Oh, I do so entirely agree with you!
the Duchess would reply.
Oh, but there’s no comparison.
At the name of Mme Trombert, my mother exclaimed: Ah!
there’s a new recruit who will bring in others.
Verdurin himself would be told how M.
Elegant women did not go to her house.
Mme de Marsantes was on tenterhooks.
she would exclaim; So they’ve gone up a step?
She does not ask that they shall respect her God.
They take her up.
Yes, the Cottards and the Duchesse de Vendôme.
Don’t you think that might be rather fun?
People oughtn’t to play with fire, snapped Mme Bontemps, furious.
and Mme Bontemps!
Not immediately, however.
It is true that the garden boasted only two.
The unusual hour presented the scene in a new light.
It was M.
all by yourself?
What is one to do?
Ten minutes to one.
She gets later every day.
I strained my ears to catch the slightest sound.
But that disappointment was scarcely more than spiritual.
But we shall also relinquish it last.
Isn’t it beautiful, that Vinteuil sonata?
Swann asked me.
Really, you women are superb!
Mme Swann laughed.
Isn’t that so, Charles dear?
But I’m only repeating what I’ve been told.
A frightful woman!
But what has she got to do with the Zoo?
Charles, you really are too dreadful!
I was thinking of what the Singhalese said to her.
Do tell him, Charles, it really is a gem.
Oh, it’s too silly.
Now, Charles, don’t mock.
I’m not mocking at all.
… She’s a nothing!
Mme Swann interjected.
Anyhow, this classification seems to have displeased the black.
 I do think that’s so delightful!
I adore that story.
Don’t you think it’s a good one.
Can’t you see old Blatin standing there?
Me nigger; you old cow!
They did not interest me in the least.
You can’t understand that any more than I, can you?
You can understand what he must be feeling.
But he doesn’t ever think you naughty.
He thinks you’re quite perfect.
Poor Papa, that’s because he’s far too good himself.
Is it because, on the days when M.
Don’t you see Mme de Montmorency?
here’s someone who will interest you!
Swann doffed his hat.
Come, come, will you put your hat on, you!
Just fancy, she’s the niece of Napoleon I.
Isn’t that interesting?
Talk to her a little.
He’s behaved like a perfect peeg!
I had him to dine once.
I had invited him for seven o’clock.
Of course he was dead drunk.
That hardly encouraged me to make another attempt.
We were standing a little way off, Swann and I.
I can’t think why my wife keeps on making conversation.
I have my own keys.
I go in and out when I choose.
He would go and do that!
This seemed to be only natural.
We could hear their raised voices.
Now do as you like.
she exclaimed, You know the concert begins at half-past.
And she told her governess to make haste.
Not the least little bit!
What do I care what people think?
We feel things for ourselves, not for the public.
I did not know who the guests were to be.
He complied with neither of my requests.
But this use of Mr.
if it meant nothing, was at least intelligible.
His work no longer appeared to me so inevitable.
Meanwhile we had taken our places at table.
I understood then the impression that M.
de Norpois had formed of him.
A relation which, incidentally, requires to be traced.
he would exclaim, it’s good!
There’s a little girl in an orange shawl.
As for those other vices to which M.
He had behaved cruelly to his wife.
It would be interesting to log’ that.
Do you mean the Caryatids?
That’s quite true.
de Norpois would have done.
The arguments of M.
But he’s an old goose!
was the answer.
What, you know Norpois?
de Norpois might have spoken ill of her to us.
I really thought I should have to dope’ him.
Yes, isn’t he?
Bergotte chimed in.
And he has had any number of others since.
He said nothing to me at the time.
Not that this need surprise us.
And that generally ends in trouble.
I reverted to M.
Swann’s two moles.
But as a rule my fears were unfounded.
Thus did one see the two natures of M.
He was right.
But it’s so nice, I do love it!
He’s been telling Mamma that he found you extremely intelligent.
Where are we going?
I asked her.
Oh, wherever you like.
You know it’s all the same to me.
I’m very sorry.
You really think not?
After what M.
Moreover, what he had said about M.
Are you being properly looked after?
Bergotte asked me.
Who is treating you?
he told me.
I know nothing about him as a doctor.
But I’ve met him at Mme Swann’s.
The man’s an imbecile.
They need at least a doctor who understands that disease.
You can see it there, reflected in his glasses.
This manner of speaking tired me greatly.
de Norpois’s white waistcoat.
He’s a great admirer of your books, I replied.
That is the answer of the unsociable, of the dissenter.
Swann introduced you to Bergotte?
An excellent acquaintance, a charming relationship!
exclaimed my father sarcastically: That really does crown it all!
I dare say!
retorted my father.
That simply proves that he’s a false and malevolent fellow.
de Norpois had found me extremely intelligent.
The evil merely seemed to him the greater.
Instantly the situation changed.
he said that he found you intelligent, repeated my mother.
he said that, did he?
People say all sorts of things.
That’s quite true; I’ve noticed it myself, my father admitted.
But I dared not do so for two reasons.
But Mamma would not hear of it for a moment.
I do not know Mme Swann.
But neither does she know you.
But I remained unconvinced, and preferred not to invite Gilberte.
I was now alone.
How about that?
Wouldn’t that be thrilling?
Then there’s nothing doing tonight?
How do you say that: Rachel when from the Lord’?
Oh, that’s a nice one, that is.
I’m going to make a match of you two.
You won’t regret it, you’ll see.
The following days were not, alas, to prove more propitious.
But I was reasonable.
After all, Bergotte’s coming.
And finally she added: Do come!
At length Mme Swann left us.
It’s you who are not being nice, was her answer.
Yes I am!
Naturally, you think yourself nice!
And Gilberte’s words were affectionate.
No; that wouldn’t be any good.
I can’t explain.
But she would have said to herself: Back again!
She would be certain to write to me to apologise.
I transferred my hopes to the afternoon post.
I was not unhappy, except one day at a time.
And even that is an exaggeration.
I knew how chimerical was this hope.
Mme Swann extended this to include her flowers.
As we all have, I dare say.
Aren’t we to see anything of your delicious daughter?
she wound up.
And your babies?
she went on to Mme Cottard.
I breathed a sigh of relief.
No, I shall write her a note this evening.
You know she’s simply devoted to you, said Mme Swann.
Really, you won’t come tomorrow?
But at once I relapsed into my gloom.
you’re a woman of virtue!
Well, it’s more than I can stand.
And my niece Albertine is just like me.
You’ve no idea how insolent she is, that child.
cried Mme Swann.
Straight out like that!
Slap-bang, right in the face!
She made no bones about it, I can tell you!
But Madame, it’s what one is able to do!
I expect you’re not highly strung.
It’s a dreadful thing to have a temperament like mine.
I can’t help it.
My husband says I’ll cost him his place.
What if I do!
Pooh to the Ministry!
Yes, pooh to the Ministry!
Life would be dreadfully monotonous without it.
No, you know I always swear by Raudnitz.
Besides, it’s only an old thing I’ve had done up.
it’s really smart!
Guess how much … No, change the first figure!
You don’t say so!
Why, it’s dirt cheap, it’s a gift!
Three times that at least, I was told.
Do you recognise it?
What am I to tell him?
I met all the flower of Reaction!
No, what she likes are her Wednesdays, good talkers.
Can I drop you anywhere?
It’s a regular godsend to me who have no charioteer.
Besides, it’s so damp.
It can’t be at all good for your husband’s eczema.
You haven’t rats in the house, I hope!
Oh, dear no.
What a horrid idea!
That’s a good thing; I was told you had.
No, no, I’ve no regular florist except Debac.
Oh, you’re unfaithful to him with Lachaume, are you?
she added, laughing.
You can’t possibly be going anywhere else before dinner.
Really, you won’t let yourself be tempted?
In your house, Odette, one is never short of victuals.
I must say that I am more eclectic.
As my husband would say, they’re the ne plus ultra.
Oh, but these are home-made.
You won’t, really?
cried Mme Bontemps, not clever, you!
the Prince clutched at this straw.
My ears must have played me false!
she asked him.
cried Mme Bontemps.
She stared at me and said Lohengrin?
Oh, yes, the new review at the Folies-Bergère.
I hear it’s a perfect scream!
Well, I ask you!
I could have hit her.
You wouldn’t care to dine with us on Wednesday week?
We could go on together to Mme Verdurin’s.
I should never dare to go there by myself.
Won’t you dine with us, too?
said Mme Bontemps to Mme Swann.
What will be happening?
There won’t be too big a crowd, I hope!
I certainly shan’t be there, said Odette.
So the Doctor is not mad about flowers, like you?
Mme Swann asked Mme Cottard.
Wait, though, he does have one passion.
inquired Mme Bontemps.
Artlessly Mme Cottard replied: Reading.
Oh, that’s a very restful passion in a husband!
cried Mme Bontemps, suppressing a diabolical laugh.
But it does, for his eyesight.
You see, I quote my authorities!
And finally she said to me: Really, must you go?
Well then, good-bye!
But I knew very well that it would be.
On the days that followed, I wept a great deal.
My mind is made up.
This is my final attempt.
I am seeing you now for the last time.
Soon I shall love you no longer!
But to what end?
The last time!
She would not have heard me.
Alas, I see now that it is not so difficult.
I assure you, she’s quite a nice woman really.
She seemed to be so much younger.
But Mme Swann refused to wear it.
I continued to resist.
and that would be the end of it.
A moment later, I had reached Gilberte’s door.
I was received by Mme Swann.
she will be sorry!
was my greeting, I can’t think why she isn’t in.
I thought I saw her in the Avenue des Champs-Elysées.
Oh, I don’t think it can have been her.
Must you go?
Where had they been?
But happiness can never be achieved.
I put my ten thousand francs in a drawer.
But they were no longer of any use to me.
This was not my case with regard to Gilberte.
Mine were steadily growing less.
To the Gilberte whom I carried within me.
But after a time, absence may prove efficacious.
Only, we must allow time.
And by association this memory brought back to me another.
One becomes moral as soon as one is unhappy.
But there are others that take effect within us.
From then on, it is almost pleasant.
Then Gilberte ceased to confine herself to preterition.
My sufferings were no longer excessive.
I used to arrive at the Arc-de-Triomphe about noon.
We would walk a little way together.
You aren’t ever coming to see Gilberte again?
I’m sure she’s very sorry about it, too.
You’ll be having races, regattas, it will be delightful.
I think it went home!
Surely this is not the enraptured traveller Ruskin speaks of.
You shall have a letter tomorrow from your Mamma.
Of thought, in relation to Françoise, one could hardly speak.
The vast world of ideas did not exist for her.
What does Mme de Sévigné say?
And so I endeavoured to prolong them.
Now, now, sit still and rest, said my grandmother.
If you can’t manage to sleep, read something.
She never travelled anywhere without a volume of each.
They were her two favourite authors.
An old ticket-collector came to ask for our tickets.
I wanted to ask him to sit down beside us.
What can I do but answer it?
as the Dostoievsky side of Mme de Sévigné’s Letters.
Presently there gathered behind it reserves of light.
I felt the need to be noticed by her.
She did not see me; I called to her.
She retraced her steps.
People seemed not to understand what I meant.
It was also something less, perhaps.
My sense of loneliness was further increased a moment later.
Oh, do let me!
It’s such a joy for your Granny.
and shortly afterwards my grandmother would appear.
Why, Granny could tell it a mile away!
But next morning!
In seaside life one does not know one’s neighbours.
You’re privileged, you’ll be home in time for lunch.
Privileged, you say?
Well, and why not?
It’s on hire for twenty francs.
Really, that’s interesting!
Why should I?
asked the president, concealing his rapture in an exaggerated astonishment.
Because of my guests, do you mean?
After all, they must feed somewhere!
Of course it’s smart!
They were the de Cambremers, weren’t they?
I recognised them at once.
She’s a Marquise.
And quite genuine, too.
Not through the females.
I thought you were coming to join us.
No, no, no, no!
We lie hidden, like the modest violet.
They weren’t going to eat you.
Why, of course!
Why, I’m dining there tomorrow.
Would you care to go instead of me?
I mean it.
Honestly, I’d just as soon stay here.
But you go to Féterne too, don’t you?
he went on, turning to the notary.
Aimé, you can tell M.
A small moustache, looked like a military man.
Well, that was the Marquis de Cambremer!
Was it indeed?
I’m not surprised to hear it.
That’ll teach him!
And next day M.
If one day M.
We must ask Aimé to let us have some.
Quite the contrary.
Her situation aroused Françoise’s pity, and also her benevolent contempt.
Home, says she!
Françoise would refuse to appear surprised.
They’re quite delicious down here!
What, your daughter writes to you every day?
Oh yes, of course, you read Mme de Sévigné.
She refers to it too often to be really sincere.
She’s not very natural.
Françoise was naturally deeply touched by these attentions.
Not like so many queens and highnesses.
She has real merit.
I’m told your father is a most charming man.
He is having a splendid holiday just now.
de Norpois had lost their luggage.
There were sounds of uproar.
But never fear—just wait till I’ve finished my little investigation.
I’ve discovered something.
Oh, isn’t Mme Poncin simply wonderful?
I never saw … But do tell us!
Just listen to this.
Did you ever!
A woman with a nigger-boy, you mean?
That’s the one.
You don’t say!
Do you happen to know her name?
Yes, I made a mistake on purpose.
I picked up her card.
She trades under the name of the Princesse de Luxembourg’!
Wasn’t I right to have my doubts about her?
The president quoted Mathurin Régnier’s Macette to the judge.
But I never saw the same one twice.
And the president would charitably remark: I envy you.
I wish I had gone there instead.
They must be well worth seeing.
At last Mme de Villeparisis appeared.
Mme de Villeparisis belonged to both these categories.
So that one could be certain of its being genuine.
and even startled us with such remarks as: Oh!
the aristocracy in these days, what does it amount to?
Like those novels of Stendhal which you seem to admire.
My father, who used to meet him at M.
And the universe had appeared to me more interesting.
Mme de Villeparisis’s carriage moved fast.
It may have been.
I knew no one at Balbec.
It was agreed that I should join them there later.
I had a five-franc piece in my pocket.
But you can’t miss it; it’s a carriage and pair.
But this time it remained incomplete.
I felt indeed that I ought to do so.
Where had I looked at them before?
I could not tell.
Presently, at a cross-roads, the carriage left them.
It was time to be thinking of home.
Often dusk would have fallen before we reached the hotel.
And you think that good, do you?
she would ask, inspired, as you call it.
You quote me a fine phrase of M.
de Chateaubriand’s about moonlight.
de Chateaubriand used often to come to see my father.
You ought to have heard M.
de Chateaubriand for a stroll after dinner.
de Chateaubriand very eloquent?
He talked to you about the moonlight.
how did you know?
He did; but how in the world …?
my dear sir, you’re a magician.
My father was no magician, but M.
At least Musset had some talent as a poet.
What, you don’t know the speech?
It’s a masterpiece of irony and impertinence.
As for Victor Hugo, she told us that M.
I was always very hungry.
Not at all!
Why, I’m delighted, what could be nicer?
Give them your coats to take upstairs.
I think you’ve hurt his feelings, said the Marquise.
Here, take this chair.
Oh, if you don’t mind, not that one!
I shouldn’t feel comfortable.
She asked a young servant who it was.
The Duchesse de La Rochefoucauld, ma’am.
Very well, say that I am at home.
A quarter of an hour passed; no one came.
What about the Duchesse de La Rochefoucauld?
my mother asked, where is she?
Often she had seen them born.
That’s the only way to get really good ones.
And they’re the rarest of luxuries.
Won’t you sit down?
she said, bringing it forward.
And the Duchess filled it from side to side.
But are you all alone?
my mother once asked M.
Is Mme de La Rochefoucauld not at home?
I don’t see her.
charming of you!
Once I said to her: I couldn’t live without you.
We must be a bit pluckier than that.
We both fell silent.
We dared not look one another in the face.
You know what a creature of habit I am.
My grandmother left the room for a moment.
My intelligence might have told me the opposite.
This insolence which I surmised in M.
I was the victim of a mirage.
His father would not have shared my regret.
There was, however, this rather painful consideration: that if M.
I scarcely knew my father, he used to say.
He seems to have been a charming man.
His tragedy was the deplorable age in which he lived.
Indeed they tell me that he was fond of literature.
You would think you were in the Rue d’Aboukir.
It was my old friend Bloch.
Now this Jewish colony was more picturesque than pleasing.
Thereupon Bloch made me the prettiest speeches.
You must be suffering from a severe attack of snobbery.
Tell me, are you a snob?
I think so, what?
Not that his desire to be friendly had suddenly changed.
It was better to seek an outlet in another direction.
I said merely that he was not being very polite.
And he gave an audible sob.
Yes, really, he’s thrilled to know M.
He consoled himself for his inability to portray M.
But these subjective enjoyments remained hidden from other people.
The Marquis de Saint-Loup-en-Bray!
I’ll be jiggered!
Can this prodigy be indeed a child of mine!
was an indisputable score.
Bloch himself and the machine his own invention.
You weren’t invited to Solomon’s yesterday?
one of the family would ask another.
I wasn’t one of the elect.
What was on?
Ah, well, said M.
Now he’ll have something else to look forward to.
I couldn’t tell you exactly which, because he’s very discreet.
I saw that he had changed his clothes.
How are you?
Good gracious, I shall be forgetting my own name next!
she exclaimed with a laugh.
Here am I calling you Baron de Guermantes.
Let me introduce the Baron de Charlus.
Of course he is: Palamède de Guermantes.
It’s his brother who has the place now.
Yes, and a lovely sight they are!
Saint-Loup was ironical.
There are also some stunning pictures by Gustave Moreau.
Then what is your uncle?
He bears the title of Baron de Charlus.
Saint-Loup smiled again.
de Charlus had had?
Good lord, no!
My grandmother was delighted with M.
de Charlus had reconciled it with them.
It was none the less true that M.
With which he rejoined the Marquise.
Is Mme Blandais not well?
her husband was asked.
We haven’t seen her all morning.
The least thing upsets her.
But I expect you’ll see her this evening.
I’ve told her she ought to come down.
It can do her nothing but good.
de Charlus say to my grandmother: Ah!
Charming of them, is it not, my dear aunt?
But I failed to understand how M.
Not a sound, not a movement betrayed that M.
de Charles had so much as heard my question.
de Charlus answered me not a word.
No doubt, had it not been for those eyes, M.
But however much M.
They’re nothing but women, he said with scorn.
In absence one is liberal with the hours.
One anticipates a time for which one is longing.
She found in M.
de Charlus a delicacy, a sensibility that were quite feminine.
And anyhow she was with her.
And La Bruyère.
It’s the same with a mystic’s love for his God.
You like Andromaque and Phèdre that much?
Saint-Loup asked his uncle in a faintly contemptuous tone.
Society people really are appalling, Saint-Loup murmured in my ear.
But the bevy of young girls whom M.
Often while M.
It is of no importance!
His voice rose.
I use it to keep my brooms in.
Would you believe it?
he went on.
For that alone, these Israels ought to be in prison.
Which, after all, ruins Gabriel’s façade, replied M.
de Charlus saying dryly: It is Charlus.
May I come in, Monsieur?
I thanked M.
Not at all, he answered in a gentler voice.
You see a great deal of her.
There are so many of which that cannot be said!
I have another volume of Bergotte here.
Presently a page came.
Go and find me your head waiter.
de Charlus stiffly.
Monsieur Aimé, sir?
asked the page.
I cannot tell you his name.
Run along, I’m in a hurry.
A few minutes went by.
The page returned.
Aimé has gone to bed.
But I can take a message.
No, you must get him out of bed.
But I can’t do that, sir; he doesn’t sleep here.
Then you can leave us alone.
That is just what I was thinking, after all.
de Charlus continued to walk up and down the room.
and left the room.
I adore her!
Good day, Monsieur.
Comes to die the pale Adriatic.
Bloch knew them personally.
In fact, all the famous people M.
What’s all this fandangle?
Does your mother know you’re out?
And the misses Bloch collapsed in a tempest of laughter.
That is the intellectual meaning.
My word, what a bore the brute can be.
I really must stop my subscription.
It’s such a rigmarole—stodgy stuff!
And he helped himself to another slice of bread.
This illusory importance of M.
Bloch’s being called the Duc d’Aumale’s double.
Whenever he was mentioned, it was always: Bloch?
The Duc d’Aumale?
as people say Princesse Murat?
The Queen of Naples?
No, replied M.
We’re very strict there, don’t you know.
Isn’t Sir Rufus Israels the president?
Is he a really amazing cove, this Bergotte?
I’ve met him several times at dress rehearsals, said M.
He is an uncouth creature, a sort of Schlemihl.
And so he cast a reproving glance at his uncle.
He has talent, said Bloch.
All writers have talent, said M.
He hasn’t the necessary calibre.
Bloch, while M.
Meschores, in the Bible, means the servant of God.
Nissim Bernard and M.
At such times M.
Hence, far from being mollified by his uncle’s plea, M.
Bloch, beside himself with rage, could contain himself no longer.
Are you the son of the Marquis de Marsantes?
Why, I knew him very well, said M.
Nissim Bernard to Saint-Loup.
The fact was that in M.
Nissim Bernard the love of ostentation, which in M.
For instance, if he was staying in an hotel, M.
Nissim Bernard, as M.
Well, upon my word!
He was a charming man, sparkling.
They have forgotten to consult M.
Coquelin has let it be known that he is displeased.
They had all been taken.
He told us that it was a Rubens.
Saint-Loup asked innocently if it was signed.
That was my uncle, replied Saint-Loup, somewhat ruffled.
He shook with laughter.
I’m sorry about that; it makes him less complete.
He’s killing when you see him go by.
Whoever she is, he went on, hearty congratulations.
You can’t have been bored with her.
My continued silence did not appear to please Bloch.
I’m bound to see her again some night.
Is that M.
Isn’t he my equal?
You talk like an aristocrat!
he added scornfully.
An old trout, was his comment.
Like all that lot.
She’s a sort of cousin of mine, by the way.
But not that one!
We can’t forgive her.
Whereas Saint-Loup’s family found him soured.
Society does not consist exclusively of imbeciles.
His telegrams obliged him to make a much longer journey.
I would not hear of it.
I was sorry that he was not at Balbec.
They were now quite near me.
From the depths of what universe did she discern me?
Was, then, the happiness of knowing these girls unattainable?
It could not be so with me now.
They’re beginning to go now; the days are drawing in.
We don’t own a factory; we haven’t any employees.
For aristocracy is a relative thing.
I went into my room.
But next Easter, yes!
Perhaps some of the greatest masterpieces were written while yawning.
All this dizzy activity became fixed in a quiet harmony.
another to change the wine or to bring clean glasses.
Then the corridor too began to empty.
I raised my hat without stopping.
But you could hear them whispering: That’s young Saint-Loup.
It’s true love!
What a handsome fellow he is!
I think he’s just wonderful.
And what style!
Some women have all the luck, don’t they?
And he’s so nice in every way.
They were quite inseparable, those two.
He was going the pace in those days.
But he’s given it all up now, she can’t complain.
she can certainly consider herself lucky.
I wonder what in the world he sees in her.
Oh, he knew me all right.
as one sings a refrain.
Philosophy distinguishes often between free and necessary acts.
They could tell me nothing.
Later on, a photograph showed me why.
Presently Saint-Loup’s visit drew to an end.
I had not seen those girls again on the beach.
A waiter undertook to convey this missive to the celebrity.
Oh, he does take a lot of trouble!
I began to think that he did not know him.
Elstir did not stay talking to us for long.
She flung a rapid glance in my direction.
Oh, no, of course not; it was a Saturday.
It did not, perhaps, of necessity fall on a Saturday.
And at that very moment I caught sight of them.
This was enough to make me begin to love them.
One can feel an attraction towards a particular person.
he exclaimed, you were disappointed by the porch!
Because, you know, it’s all a question of genius.
All the ages are there.
Not at all, he assured me, it’s perfectly true.
Some parts of it are quite oriental.
Not at all, he replied.
Do you know that girl, Monsieur?
I was barely conscious of who Albertine Simonet was.
I could not contain my admiration.
It’s all ages ago now.
And what has become of the model?
Quick, give it to me!
The window-sill was already aglow.
Our excursion would be a pure waste of time.
In fact she did not stay very long.
She was dressed with the utmost simplicity.
She was one for me, and doubtless for him too.
I sacrificed a minute to look at them.
It was finished at last.
We strolled down to the front.
And as we go, do tell me about Carquethuit.
It’s very curious, and moreover extremely wild.
Dusk was falling; it was time to be turning homewards.
Elstir was about to call me.
They disappeared down a side-street; he came towards me.
My whole plan was wrecked.
What did I know of Albertine?
Was she even the child of her reputed father?
With women like that, one could never be sure.
Finally, everything was settled.
The child came to thank the ladies.
Did her mother have pretty hair like that?
Then why did you stand a mile away?
They were in a hurry.
The painting is not too bad, but it’s different.
By the way, that’s not a real name, surely?
Elstir was silent.
It couldn’t be Mme Swann before she was married?
Elstir did not reply.
The portrait was indeed that of Odette de Crécy.
But there were others less apparent.
but Why, it isn’t the least bit like her!
We do not recognise her.
He had painted the portrait of Odette de Crécy.
But, looking up, he read it on my face.
His own assumed an expression of annoyance.
They represent a struggle and a victory.
Meanwhile we had reached his door.
I was disappointed at not having met the girls.
I took leave of Elstir; I was alone once again.
The distance was, as a matter of fact, nothing.
I hope that it may never come to an end.
Nevertheless it was Albertine.
Pleasure in this respect is like photography.
I thought at first that I should fail in this.
Don’t you do anything here?
You don’t ride either.
You must be bored stiff.
You must have plenty of time on your hands.
You weren’t at the Sogne races?
It took us two whole hours!
But to me it was peculiarly delightful.
Been playing golf, Octave?
How did it go?
Were you in form?
Oh, it’s too sickening; I’m a wash-out, he replied.
Was Andrée playing?
Yes, she went round in seventy-seven.
Why, that’s a record!
I went round in eighty-two yesterday.
He lit a cigar with a D’you mind?
This place simply swarms with them.
Oh, no, they don’t need me.
Who’s that weird customer?
So I didn’t respond.
At your service.
I told Bloch that it was impossible.
Oh, very well, I shall go alone.
But he could not succeed in pleasing Albertine.
Typical of their creepy ways!
I had often wondered who they were.
They’re nothing very wonderful, said Albertine with a contemptuous snigger.
the Balbec dentist.
He’s a good sort.
What, you don’t know him!
Oh, he plays divinely.
You haven’t been to Cavalleria Rusticana?
Ah, I think it’s marvellous!
But what difference does that make?
I’ll show you her photo.
She, I discovered, knew all about them.
Oh, so you know the little d’Ambresacs, do you?
Well, well, you do have some grand friends.
You find them attractive, do you?
Well, it all depends on what you like.
They’re real goody-goodies.
Perhaps there’s a certain charm in that.
And then they dress in the most absurd way.
Fancy going to play golf in silk frocks!
Look at Mme Elstir.
There’s a well-dressed woman if you like.
This I lacked.
Elstir’s had been a good but only a partial influence.
It’s very good of you to attach importance to them.
You shouldn’t take any notice of them; they don’t count.
Now Andrée, I must say, is remarkably clever.
Am I disturbing you?
It was probably in the hope of meeting me.
I’ve stood it all because of the others.
But her latest effort was really too much!
I reproached Albertine for having been so disagreeable.
It will teach her to be more tactful.
She’s not a bad kid, but she’s so boring.
I hadn’t noticed it, was all that I said.
I don’t believe you would care for her, though.
She’s not in the least a flirt.
You like girls who flirt, I suspect.
She’s going back to Paris later today.
Are the rest of your friends going too?
It’s not much fun, I don’t mind telling you.
It’s such a matter of luck.
That was a piece of luck.
I’m sure I should have dried up altogether!
You see, it all depends on the examiner.
But that’s nothing.
It gets more difficult every year.
I returned to the hotel.
My grandmother was not there.
Gisèle would not be surprised to see me there.
Presently I was spending all my time among these girls.
But what matter?
For the moment it was their flowering-time.
You know we’re having tea at the golf-club.
The devil himself couldn’t make head nor tail of it.
How pretty the women can look there, too!
how I should have loved to paint it.
Elstir found them all quite hideous.
she said to the painter.
What lovely trips I’d make!
And a motor-car!
Tell me, do you think women’s fashions for motoring pretty?
No, replied Elstir, but that will come in time.
The others are all ghastly.
I asked Albertine.
Why, an enormous difference, my little man!
The long-haired warriors of heroic Hellas.
My new friends did not know them.
I’m not allowed to play with Israelites, Albertine announced.
But the cakes understood, the tarts were talkative.
Her gaiety remains external to an unchanging face.
It was with delight that I listened to their pipings.
Loving helps us to discern, to discriminate.
They were those of their parents.
The individual is steeped in something more general than himself.
They are kept in reserve.
Oh, his house is nice, is it?
A dialogue, not in any sense a discord.
She is herself, and she is still it.
All this I realised, and yet we talked so little!
So it is that grapes sweeten in the sun.
Thus one day Albertine suddenly asked: Who has a pencil?
Andrée provided one, Rosemonde the paper.
She did have a bit of luck, Albertine observed.
The characters are virile, the plot simple and strong.
The most familiar precepts are not always the truest.
Fly, as on wings, straight to the listener’s heart.
Really, you’d think she must have cribbed it somewhere!
she exclaimed when she reached the end.
And the poetry she brings in!
Where on earth can she have pinched that from?
This is how I would tackle it.
That would have been much better.
I mean Les Juives by Robert Garnier, and Montchrestien’s Aman.
Albertine could contain herself no longer.
Andrée, you really are staggering, she cried.
You must write down those names for me.
Albertine was drinking in every word.
Her eyes blazed.
Sophocles would hesitate to insist upon this point.
Andrée preserved the unruffled calm of a female dandy.
Yes, put in Albertine, so I’ve been told.
Well, you’re not absolutely wrong, Andrée told her.
Merlet and Sainte-Beuve would do no harm.
But above all you ought to mention Deltour and Gasq-Des-fossés.
I like you, she had written.
It was in a little wood on the cliff.
Not that I had never seen prettier hands than hers.
But my thoughts were all elsewhere.
Suddenly the ring passed to her neighbour.
I’ve been shoving it at you for the last hour.
I wanted to seize hold of it.
Can they go to them here?
Oh, of course!
So if I want to see them now?
Oh, not before May next year.
But can I be sure that they will be here?
They come regularly every year.
Oh, dear, yes!
And yet I never heard that Albertine had been told.
I did not care to let her know it.
I had not yet asked anything of Albertine.
I made a show of preferring Andrée.
Elstir has arranged to invite us together.
And probably she was none too happy in the thought.
I mentioned this to Andrée.
I tell you this because I understand Albertine.
Not the slightest, I can assure you!
Golf gives one a taste for solitary pleasures.
Yes, I was hearing about that, said Octave.
There’s little enough to do here as it is.
Are you playing golf this afternoon?
And he left us, followed by Andrée.
I was alone now with Albertine.
My aunt will laugh at me too.
But I shan’t tell her why, either.
But we can spend the evening together, at any rate.
My aunt will know nothing about that.
I must go and say good-bye to Andrée.
Till we meet again then.
I went into dinner with my grandmother.
What was going to happen that evening, I scarcely knew.
I found Albertine in bed.
She looked at me and smiled.
I bent over Albertine to kiss her.
Stop it or I’ll ring the bell!
I heard a sound, abrupt, prolonged and shrill.
Albertine had pulled the bell with all her might.
She then recovered her serenity.
That was the reality, the practical proof of position.
What’s that you say?
Why, they’re one of the best families in the country.
Simonet with a single n,’ you know!
But, as often happens, their machinations met with no success.
de Norpois’s character.
de Norpois, who was being useful to my father.
What possible harm could it have done you?
I’m amazed that you should have refused me.
It strikes me as improbable, impossible.
Besides, they never dreamed of doing so.
Own up now, it’s Andrée you’re in love with.
Oh, you men!
But our knowledge of faces is not mathematical.
The same was true of Albertine as of her friends.
But your shutters were still closed when the concert began.
Twelve o’clock struck, and Françoise arrived at last.
Montecitorio: the Italian Chamber of Deputies in Rome.
Ballplatz more correctly Ballhausplatz: the Austrian Foreign Ministry in Vienna.
4 The word is cocu, cuckold.
Norpois is being comically prudish.
6 The letters p.
stand for pour prendre congé, to take one’s leave.
9 This is an imaginary work.
No such Memoirs exist.
They mainly consisted of evening lecture courses.
Those who start from preconceived notions can do so.
Childhood, enclosed in its impressions, cannot.
But how do you know the Château de Guermantes?
Saint-Loup asked me.
No … but … I’ve heard of the château.
and Of course I know it!
Meanwhile the organ recital had begun.
I heard someone say: Look, a soldier.
A new Swann: Odette’s husband.
A new Cottard: Professor Cottard.
Norpois; the governmental mind; an ambassador’s conversation.
 Although’ is always an unrecognised because ’.
My first experience of Berma.
My high expectations of her—as of Balbee and Venice.
A great disappointment.
Françoise and Michelangelo.
The auditorium and the stage.
Norpois dines at our house.
Gestures which we believe have gone unnoticed.
de Norpois would not speak to Mme Swann about me.
The laws of Time.
New Year’s Day visits.
Berma and love.
I can no longer recall Gilberte’s face.
She returns to the Champs-Elysées.
They can’t stand you!
I write to Swann.
Amorous wrestle with Gilberte.
I fall ill.
A letter from Gilberte.
Love’s miracles, happy and unhappy.
The Swann apartment; the concierge; the windows.
The Henri II staircase.
The chocolate cake.
Mme Swann’s praise of Françoise: your old nurse.
The heart of the Sanctuary: Swann’s library; his wife’s bedroom.
Odette’s at home.
The famous Albertine, niece of Mme Bontemps.
The evolution of society.
Swann’s amusing sociological experiments.
Swann’s old jealousy and new love.
Outings with the Swanns.
Lunch with them.
Odette plays Vinteuil’s sonata to me.
A work of genius creates its own posterity.
What the little phrase now means to Swann.
Me nigger; you old cow!
Consistent charm of Mme Swann’s heterogeneous drawing-room.
Gilberte’s unexpected behaviour.
Lunch at the Swanns’ with Bergotte.
A writer’s voice and his style.
Bergotte and his imitators.
Unforeseeable beauty of the sentences of a great writer.
Reflecting power of genius.
Vices of the man and morality of the writer.
Bergotte and Berma.
Gilberte’s characteristics inherited from both parents.
Swann’s confidence in his daughter.
Are my pleasures those of the intelligence?
Why Swann, according to Bergotte, needs a good doctor.
Combray society and the social world.
Rachel when from the Lord.
Aunt Léonie’s furniture in the brothel.
Amatory initiation at Combray on Aunt Léonie’s sofa.
Work projects constantly postponed.
Impossibility of happiness in love.
My last visit to Gilberte.
I decide not to see her again.
Unjust fury with the Swanns’ butler.
Waiting for a letter.
Intermittency, law of the human soul.
Painful New Year’s Day.
suicide of that self which loved Gilberte.
Letters to Gilberte: one speaks for oneself alone.
New hair-styles and silhouettes.
Two walkers in the Elysian twilight.
Impossibility of happiness.
The opposing forces of memory and imagination.
Gilberte’s strange laugh, evoked in a dream.
Fewer visits to Mme Swann.
Exchange of tender letters and progress of indifference.
Odette and the Down-and-outs Club.
An intermediate social class.
Departure for Balbec.
Subjectiveness of love.
Contradictory effects of habit.
Françoise’s simple and infallible taste.
Mme de Sévigné and Dostoievsky.
Sunrise from the train; the milk-girl.
The tyranny of the Particular.
Place-names on the way to Balbec-Plage.
Arrival at Balbec-Plage.
The manager of the Grand Hotel.
My room at the top of the hotel.
Attention and habit.
My grandmother’s kindness.
The sea in the morning.
Balbec and Rivebelle.
Mme de Villeparisis.
and Mlle de Stermaria.
An actress and three friends.
The weekly Cambremer garden-party.
Poetic visions of Mlle de Stermaria.
The general manager.
Françoise’s Grand Hotel connections.
Meeting of Mme de Villeparisis and my grandmother.
The sordid moment at the end of meals.
The Princesse de Luxembourg.
Mme de Villeparisis, M.
de Norpois and my father.
The bourgeoisie and the Faubourg Saint-Germain.
Drives with Mme de Villeparisis.
The ivy-covered church.
Mme de Villeparisis’s conversation.
The handsome fishergirl.
The three trees of Hudimesnil.
The fat Duchesse de La Rochefoucauld.
My grandmother and I: intimations of death.
Robert de Saint-Loup.
My friendship with him, but real happiness requires solitude.
Saint-Loup as a work of art: the nobleman.
A Jewish colony.
Variety of human failings and similarity of virtues.
Bloch’s bad manners.
Bloch and his father.
de Charlus’s strange behaviour.
Mme de Villeparisis is a Guermantes.
Further weird behaviour.
Mme de Sévigné, La Fontaine and Racine.
Charlus comes to my room.
Dinner at the Blochs’ with Saint-Loup.
To know without knowing.
The elegance of Uncle Solomon.
Nissim Bernard; his lies.
Bloch and Mme Swann in the train.
Françoise’s view of Bloch and Saint-Loup.
Saint-Loup and his mistress.
My grandmother’s inexplicable behaviour.
The blossoming girls.
Oh, the poor old boy ….
The dark-haired cyclist: Albertine.
The name Simonet.
Rest before dinner: different aspects of the sea.
Dinners at Rivebelle.
The astral tables.
Euphoria induced by alcohol and music.
Meeting with Elstir.
A new aspect of Albertine.
Elstir’s studio; his seascapes; the painter’s metaphors.
Elstir explains to me the beauty of Balbec church.
Albertine passes by.
The portrait of Miss Sacripant.
My beautiful Gabrielle!
Age and the artist.
Elstir and the little band.
Nullity of love.
Miss Sacripant was Mme Swann and M.
One must discover wisdom for oneself.
My grandmother and Saint-Loup.
Saint-Loup and Bloch.
Afternoon party at Elstir’s.
Yet another Albertine: a well-brought-up girl.
Octave, the gigolo.
Albertine’s antipathy for Bloch.
Saint-Loup engaged to a Mlle d’Ambresac?
Albertine’s intelligence and taste.
Days with the girls.
Françoise’s bad temper.
Balbec through Elstir’s eyes.
A sketch of the Creuniers.
The mobile beauty of youth.
Friendship: and abdication of oneself.
Twittering of the girls.
Letter from Sophocles to Racine.
A love divided among several girls.
Albertine is to spend a night at the Grand Hotel.
The rejected kiss.
The attraction of Albertine.
The multiple utilisation of a single action.
Straying in the budding grove.
The different Albertines.
End of the season.
REVISED BY D.
Copyright © 1993 by Random House, Inc.
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions.
Published in the United States by Random House, Inc.
and in Great Britain by Chatto & Windus.
Revisions by D.
Jacket portrait courtesy of The Bettmann Archive.
Proust, Marcel, 1871-1922.
[Côté de Guermantes.
The Guermantes way/Marcel Proust; translated by C.
Moncrieff and Terence Kilmartin; revised by D.
Includes bibliographical references.
Series: Proust, Marcel, 1871-1922.
In other words, we had moved.
Now she listened to the very silence with painful attentiveness.
just look at the fine pheasants in the kitchen window.
Ah, poor Combray!
though what she actually muttered was: What an old rattletrap!
After this, Jupien’s presence had become less essential.
And so Jupien, her uncle, had sought employment outside.
Jupien’s here the comparison ends were, on the contrary, charming.
She had learned to stand in for him.
It’s the same kindred, anyway.
Ay, they’re a great family, the Guermantes!
as though Antoine had been a title.
In any case it’s not Catholic.
And what’s more, he’s not a courageous man.
But it was not so.
Courageous meant simply hard-working.
If so, she was not far wrong.
Why wait till they’re dead?
Down there, you can hear every hour.
Méséglise, is it?
How did I hear of Méséglise?
But it’s a well-known place.
asked the young footman.
She liked her servants to be fed properly.
Everything has to be done on the run.
They’ve been at table for at least two hours.
And she rang timidly three or four times.
Which was impossible.
de Guermantes, called him M.
Norpois, not being certain of his name.
Monsieur Norpois, indeed!
Oh, that really is good!
Just wait a little!
This individual will be calling you Citizen Norpois next?
de Guermantes, turning to the Baron.
One day when M.
I’m to stay here.
And do you ever go to the theatre?
You enjoy good health, ma’am.
Oh, if it wasn’t for these cursed legs of mine!
Good day to you.
Perhaps we’ll meet again this evening.
My father had a friend at the Ministry, one A.
For some reason or other, this A.
That art had become a poor and pitiable thing.
It was no longer inhabited by a deep-rooted soul.
In fact it was the opposite that took place.
Really, Madame d’Ambresac.
She hasn’t been sparing with her pearls.
What did it matter to me?
Then the curtain rose.
But how pleasant life seemed to me!
Not a clap!
And did you ever see such a get-up?
The latter had just come on to the stage.
It hears a sharp sound, an oddly interrogative inflexion.
It asks itself: Is that good?
Is what I am feeling now admiration?
This was precisely what Berma’s acting showed me.
Wherefore we fail to recognise them.
I had said to myself: Well, I don’t admire her.
I realised now that that was precisely what admiration meant.
I thought so at first.
This alteration in Françoise’s character was perhaps inevitable.
For she knew the truth.
She refrained from uttering it?
Was it the same with all one’s social relations?
That was the future’s secret.
For the present only Françoise was concerned.
Did she sincerely believe what she had said to Jupien?
I was genuinely in love with Mme de Guermantes.
I imagined her doing so.
I did think of it more than once.
This was by no means an impossibility.
Oh, what a bore!
I say, where are you going to sleep?
It’s quite the ça fait assez old historical dwelling.
You will have no neighbours.
No, it’s for its appearance that I recommend it.
Saint-Loup read all this in my fixed stare.
You mustn’t think I don’t understand you.
But his horse, frothing, at once reared.
Hurry up; get a move on!
But how is your health on the whole?
A little better, I hope.
You must tell me all about yourself presently.
And what about your work?
Have you settled down to it yet?
You are an odd fellow!
It amuses you more to do nothing.
Her Proudhon never leaves me.
It’s the second on the right, on the third floor.
I’ll be with you in a minute.
I was shown Saint-Loup’s room.
I sat down in the room and waited.
Suddenly I caught sight of the watch on the table.
They move, halt, become alight of their own accord.
The door opened and Saint-Loup rushed in, dropping his monocle.
Saint-Loup asked me, smiling.
Well, you flatter me!
And he has given you leave?
He hadn’t the slightest objection.
I adore him!
No, that would be going too far.
He drove them all out again.
Get out of here.
I begged him to let them stay.
No, really, they would bore you stiff.
Far from it.
We have a major here who’s an admirable man.
No, thank God!
There you have his mentality.
As it happened, I was mistaken.
The same story branches off and has a different ending.
One is no longer a person.
I hope you weren’t angry with me for bothering you.
There is something that’s worrying me, as you probably guessed.
Not at all.
I was delighted that you sent for me.
But what’s the trouble?
Things not going well?
What can I do to help?
What are you doing now?
I asked him.
I must leave you, I’m afraid.
Then it’s been a great bother to you, coming here?
I shouldn’t advise you to do that.
Sometimes my exhaustion was greater still.
How blissful then was my return to the hotel!
Charming; beneficent perhaps also.
These thoughts carried me far.
He can buy as many horses as he likes.
He’s got altogether more style on a horse!
What was the waistcoat like?
It was the height of my pack.
You measured it, I suppose!
But there’s nothing so wonderful about that cap.
How come you heard about it, old man?
From our blasted Corp?
How come I heard it?
From his batman of course!
Ah, there’s a bloke who knows when he’s well off!
I should think so!
He’s got more brass than I have, that’s for sure!
He wasn’t getting enough grub in the canteen, he says.
I liked to go there on foot.
But memories and griefs are fleeting things.
Then we pay attention to other things.
The wind grew stronger.
It was grainy and bristling with coming snow.
Why, yes, she’s my dear aunt.
Of course she is; what a fool I am.
Or another time will do; it isn’t at all important.
That’s all right, carry on.
They can wait.
Do you know the worthy Oriane, then?
But we must hurry up.
What on earth will your friends think of my manners?
They’ll think absolutely nothing.
You really are too kind.
I can’t say.
That I do not believe.
But Mme de Guermantes is different.
Why, of course I will.
We shall see.
I dare say she won’t want to see me, though.
I can’t tell you how grateful I am.
Not at all, it’s nothing.
A stupid friend would have argued.
My dear fellow!
Tears of joy!
How can I thank you?
… After you!
I can do both.
I say, Robert!
You’re quite sure you know who I mean?
Why, what do you take me for, a village idiot?
You wouldn’t care to give me her photograph, I suppose?
He blushed as he spoke.
No, really, I swear to you, you’re mistaken.
You’ve never told it to me.
Do go on.
Such is the stuff of friendship.
He’s not even sincere.
Each of us is conditioned by an idea.
Duroc all over!
Saint-Loup was not satisfied with this comparison.
He corrected himself, and added: Together with Elstir.
don’t mind my bracketing him with you, I hope?
Scrupulous accuracy, don’t you know.
Scrupulous to a fault, you see, but nevertheless, immense admiration.
You don’t agree about Stendhal?
I see you’re on my side.
Bloch can’t stand Stendhal.
I think it’s idiotic of him.
I’m so glad you agree with me.
What is it you like best in the Chartreuse?
Answer me, he urged with boyish impetuosity.
You really are astounding.
You can tell us about it afterwards.
And to me: Please go on.
What were you going to say, Gibergue?
I could almost hear him speaking.
Why, I’ve often thought so myself, replied Saint-Loup.
It’s absolutely true.
But what do you mean by that?
Give me an example or two, if you don’t mind.
It’s not very easy to explain, Saint-Loup broke in.
This was a classic feint in Napoleon’s wars.
spatial identity of battles.
That exists also.
There are predestined sites.
Battles like Ulm, Lodi, Leipzig, Cannae.
Some people make no bones about it.
It’s no more obsolete than the Iliad.
The enunciation of these theories by Saint-Loup was cheering.
You interest me enormously.
But tell me, there’s one point that puzzles me.
You tell me that battles are reproduced.
Does he really do no more than apply the rules?
But of course!
There are a dozen examples of that in 1870.
Not at all.
Well, it’s exactly the same with the art of war.
Perhaps I may have underestimated the importance of the rules.
They do change, that must be admitted.
But all that is a thing of the past.
I was listening to you quite avidly!
Ah, interchangeable; precisely!
The lad has brains, was Saint-Loup’s comment.
Is it because you find him more intelligent than me?
Do you like him better than me?
Why, yes; environment is of no importance.
The real influence is that of the intellectual environment!
One is conditioned by an idea!
All men with similar ideas are alike.
Only it seems that we are worth more, somehow.
I would look up at the sky.
I’ve just heard from my aunt.
She wants to meet you, she’s coming down here.
You don’t happen to have had any news from Paris?
Yes, he replied gloomily, bad news.
It increases the anxiety of the one who waits.
Obviously she’s being unfaithful to me with others.
And he reproached himself.
Thus silence indeed drove him mad with jealousy and remorse.
His bad dream began to fade from his memory.
He did not hesitate for long.
I dare say I shall be in Paris at Easter.
But you didn’t go there till August.
But she’s a sublime creature.
You can’t imagine the poetic delicacy there is in her.
Rather good, don’t you think?
You remember Elstir, the painter I met at Balbec?
Why, of course I do.
You remember how much I admired his work?
I do, very well; and the letter we sent him.
Of course I do.
All these digressions!
Really, I never knew that.
I’ll answer for her; leave it to me.
Oh, Robert, I do like you.
What had happened was this.
You see how our humble life appeals to you!
Better even than Négrier?
But in what respect?
Give me an example.
More than a nephew, possibly.
Still, he’s a real friend to us.
But when M.
But how far away it is!
But a premonition also of an eternal separation!
That afternoon, alas, at Doncières, the miracle did not occur.
I cried to her, Granny!
Speak to me!
I ran there, for it was nearly closing time.
The post office was closing for the night.
Finally I got my connexion.
Is that you, Granny?
And then all was explained.
You haven’t seen Sergeant Saint-Loup, by any chance?
He’s already gone down, sir, said the old soldier.
I never saw him, said the graduate.
When the Cap’n sees that, officer’s cloth, my word!
It isn’t officer’s cloth, it’s just ordinary cloth.
inquired the old soldier angrily.
so it’s just ordinary cloth?
so it’s just ordinary cloth!
You’d better not spin your cock-and-bull yarns here.
There, look, there’s the Cap’n coming along.
Would you call that a non-com?
And his eyeglass—it’s all over the shop.
This was Jupien.
These invariably passed off after a while.
Meanwhile the winter was drawing to an end.
The weather had now become milder.
Her face appeared dreamy beneath its pile of fair hair.
But, after all, the streets belong to everybody.
But in these afternoon hours I lacked both.
Saint-Loup came to Paris for a few hours only.
You pay her far too great a compliment.
You wouldn’t care to meet my cousin Poictiers?
There’s an intelligent young woman whom you’d like.
I’ve told her about you.
She said I was to bring you to see her.
She’s much prettier than Oriane, and younger, too.
You see what I mean, don’t you?
She’s a very good sort, I assure you.
The weather had turned chilly again.
To catch your death?
de Norpois went when he met him about the place.
It’s to see Mme de Villeparisis.
They’re great friends; I never knew anything about it.
It seems she’s a delightful person, a most superior woman.
He praised you very highly.
For I can see you won’t do anything else.
If only I had been able to start writing!
My father, in the meantime, had met M.
de Guermantes once or twice, and, now that M.
He tells me she’s his aunt; Viparisi,’ he pronounces it.
He tells me, too, she’s an extraordinarily able woman.
And yet, when M.
This visit was now imminent.
My father had come home speechless with rage.
Next day my mother met Mme Sazerat in someone’s house.
My father, a friend of M.
Méline,9 was convinced that Dreyfus was guilty.
His opinions were well known.
He came near to being looked upon as a Nationalist.
Seeing me, he stopped.
Ah, those aristocrats!
I belong to a different planet.
It’s a necklace she saw at Boucheron’s.
She will be jolly pleased with it, I know.
I took a path which led me into a meadow.
And how they would have pained him!
Robert noticed that I seemed moved.
I exchanged a few words with Saint-Loup’s mistress.
We cut across the village.
Its houses were sordid.
Come on, we’ll all go to the rink together.
But how was it to be done?
She had done nothing blameworthy.
It was true that she was literary.
Right you are.
Let’s go away.
Besides, what would your family say?
The poor martyr!
But long before then he’ll be dead!
Isn’t that appalling?
He had an intelligent and vigorous but respectful air.
Anything specially interesting about that waiter, Zézette?
he inquired, after sharply dismissing Aimé.
One would think you were making a study of him.
There we go again; I knew it would happen!
You knew what would happen, my dear girl?
She has done good work, you know.
But the shrewd intelligence is more exacting.
de Jussieu10 might have worn.
They were faces well known to all the regular customers.
There, you see!
He’s certain to give us away.
Presently the carriage departed.
Ah, so that’s it!
So it’s the young man over there, now, is it?
But, Zézette, it’s for me that it’s unpleasant.
Oh, no, I think he’s charming.
Waiter, my things.
She then wanted to know what I thought of him.
He has an amusing expression, hasn’t he?
But that would be all.
It’s silly of Robert to imagine things.
She was still gazing at Aimé.
Do look what dark eyes he has.
I should love to know what goes on behind them.
They were drinking champagne.
What a bore you are.
Then tell her about Françoise in the Champs-Elysées.
She’ll enjoy that.
Bobby has told me so much about Françoise.
One number in the programme I found extremely painful.
But seen thus, she was another woman.
Young men who knew them were waiting for them outside.
He loved her already.
I’ve never had a chance to mention it.
I waved to you in the street.
Don’t speak about it, he replied, I was so sorry.
I assure you I felt quite wretched about it.
So he had recognised me!
You’ll be missing your call again.
what bliss it would be if you did go.
I warn you, if I do, I shan’t come back.
That’s more than I should dare to hope.
that doesn’t surprise me in the least.
No one else can possibly give it to you.
So that’s it!
An agreement like that isn’t binding.
You’ve behaved treacherously towards me.
You’ll hear from me before long, don’t you worry.
Robert was in the right a hundred times over.
You don’t understand what I mean about the necklace.
I made no formal promise.
How am I self-interested?
Isn’t he too wonderful with his hands!
I pointed to the scenery which barred my way.
Would you mind, sir, throwing away your cigar?
The smoke is bad for my friend.
You look just like a woman yourself.
The dancer smiled mysteriously at the actress.
You’re driving me crazy, she cried to him.
The larks we’ll have!
What, didn’t it strike you?
You must be going blind.
Keep your hair on, old chap.
You seem to be rather het up.
And that Saint-Loup was beautiful was beyond dispute.
That generation is reflected but not continued in them.
Flung to the winds in what way?
The Romanians, the Egyptians, the Turks may hate the Jews.
It will give me pleasure, Florimond,’ said the King.
de Castries, and found the request perfectly natural.
When he understood that it was M.
Decazes at his ball … Yes, indeed, I remember M.
It was simply a habit of M.
Meanwhile he was cut short by Bloch.
Mme de Villeparisis asked the librarian.
He made them tell you just like that!
And then there was M.
Perhaps Mme Leroi also knew these European celebrities.
How d’ye do, Alix?
Besides, it was only tit for tat.
Everyone had risen.
They were very exclusive chapters.
The King’s daughters not admitted!
cried Bloch in amazement, why ever not?
Bloch’s bewilderment increased.
The House of France?
When was that?
But it wasn’t you who brought him here.
Alix’s shot had misfired; she stood silent, erect and motionless.
Ah, I see another fine portrait, said the historian.
Did you tell him I was at home?
He heard the voices.
Oh, very well then, show him in.
It’s a gentleman who was introduced to me, she explained.
I certainly never said he might.
He stopped short on catching sight of me.
I hear all about you from Madeleine, she added.
Perhaps, too, his optimism reflected a desire to be original.
In fact it was really enchanting.
You have never read Joubert?
he would have admired you so!
He had not your force.
But he had a similar gracefulness.
It was too beautiful!
thought Mme de Villeparisis.
Besides, I detest Carmen Sylva’s poetry.
In that sort of thing she’s incomparable.
Alix bore the blow without flinching.
She remained marble.
Her gaze was piercing and blank, her nose proudly arched.
But the surface of one cheek was flaking.
Perhaps another winter would finally lay her low.
Legrandin, murmured Mme de Villeparisis.
Oh, but I know her very well!
exclaimed Mme de Guermantes, clapping her hand to her mouth.
And she did.
I can’t tell you what it was like.
What does scrivener’ mean?
asked Mme de Villeparisis.
I haven’t the slightest idea!
cried the Duchess in mock indignation.
I don’t want to know.
I don’t speak that sort of language.
But it’s a horror of a word.
It’s enough to make your wisdom teeth drop out.
I can’t get used to the idea.
But after all it’s not inconceivable.
Mme de Guermantes had sat down.
The Duchess would talk to the poet about the weather.
They sat down to lunch.
Do you like this way of doing eggs?
she would ask the poet.
This reserve was simply a matter of good form.
I thought I should find Basin here.
We met her at dinner last night at Blanche Leroi’s.
You wouldn’t know her now, she’s positively enormous.
I’m sure she must be ill.
I promised I’d let you know just in case.
Hannibal de Bréauté was there.
I mean M.
It would be such a pleasure.
I gather that he didn’t behave very well.
He was presented to M.
What is that person’s name?
Pierre, I whispered.
Pierre: it’s his name, he’s a very distinguished historian.
You don’t say so.
I’m like you, I can never get used to it.
You were speaking just now, Madame la Marquise, of M.
She really is astonishing, the little Duchess, said M.
It can’t be M.
de Borelli everyday, or M.
Schlumberger or M.
But then it’s bound to be M.
Pierre Loti or M.
Flowers of their time!
That is a most ingenious theory, exclaimed Legrandin.
Why yes, so they are!
Such a bore.
I never heard of that before, said the historian.
It’s the fashionable complaint just now, the archivist informed him.
She treated her princely relatives, as she treated M.
Bloch got up to go.
I have better news, she murmured in my ear.
I’m interested from the Balzacian point of view.
I could give him no information whatsoever.
Oh, well, if it’s bad for you!
Bloch was downcast.
But you can’t say it’s not hot in here.
He received none, from these well-bred people.
He acknowledged his defeat with: What’s the temperature?
Twenty-two at least, I should say.
I’m not surprised.
I’m simply dripping.
I must say, I think the opposite.
It’s exactly what gives you your cold.
Bloch had expressed delight at the idea of meeting M.
And isn’t he a bit senile?
Good gracious, never!
the Marquise put in.
Just wait a minute.
I don’t know what he can be doing.
de Norpois to come, she ordered.
He doesn’t much approve of what’s happening.
de Norpois to introduce them to Mme de Villeparisis.
They knew the address.
They went to the house.
They did not see its mistress.
Are things going better?
You’re not in a hurry?
she now asked Bloch.
No, not at all.
Why, that’s just where my nephew Châtellerault’s got to go.
You must fix it up together.
Is he still here?
He’s over there, stammered Bloch, overwhelmed with delight.
Perhaps, too, all this bowing and scraping by M.
Monsieur Bloch, Monsieur le Marquis de Norpois.
On the contrary, it is I who am delighted.
But this ceremony, which M.
Just ask him anything you want to know.
That is so, isn’t it?
she raised her voice, you knew Bismarck well.
Have you got anything on the stocks?
Are you preparing something for us?
You were greatly smitten with Bergotte, if I remember rightly.
I don’t dispute his pictorial talent; no one would, Duchess.
he went on, turning again to me.
Another of my great favourites, I told him, is Elstir.
de Norpois with a surprised and reproachful air.
He was right.
Do you mean to say you know her, Duchess?
What an admirable man!
d’Argencourt asked the Duchess.
I pointed out that I was going to Balbec.
Going to Balbec again?
Why, you’re a regular globe-trotter.
Then he listened to what I had to say.
At the name of Leroy-Beaulieu, he looked at me suspiciously.
He is too big a man for that.
He is not an orator, thank heaven.
Besides, he would not get many votes.
For the present, there is nothing to be done.
Later on, I can’t say.
de Norpois repeatedly dismissed his brother Academicians as old fossils.
if it only rested with me!
You know who we’re talking about, Basin?
the Duchess asked her husband.
I can make a pretty good guess, said the Duke.
In fact, it was drolatic, put in M.
After all, one never knows anything, does one?
she concluded with an air of weary scepticism.
I say, though, what about Swann?
Oh, but Swann’s case was quite different, the Duchess protested.
muttered Mme de Villeparisis.
You didn’t find her pretty?
Yes, really, it wasn’t worth the trouble, was it?
Oh, a mere nothing—what?
And then, if you’d heard the things she recited!
Dear, dear, what a snob she must be!
But, wait a minute, why, I know the whole play.
It isn’t, by any chance, by Sâr Péladan?
So you know The Seven Princesses, do you?
said the Duchess.
I congratulate you!
If they’re all like the one I’ve seen!
What a goose!
I thought to myself, irritated by her icy greeting.
Really, I’m too kind.
Well, it’s my turn now to ignore her.
It was enough to make you howl with laughter.
Oh, I say, cried M.
I’ve come to ask your forgiveness.
This gentleman makes you an admirable daughter, commented M.
Tell me, my dear aunt, M.
No, replied Mme de Villeparisis, no relation at all.
These are plain Grandins.
Grandins of nothing at all.
This one has a sister called Mme de Cambremer.
She stayed a solid hour; I thought I’d go mad.
I couldn’t think what they were supposed to be advertising.
Bloch and M.
de Norpois had risen and were now in our vicinity.
As this presumably meant that M.
What were the important points which M.
de Norpois of Bloch’s literary work.
de Norpois referred.
de Norpois’s own views.
To Bloch’s questions M.
They are Lieutenant-Colonel Henry and Lieutenant-Colonel Picquart.
And they are fighting against one another like two lions.
de Norpois made no reply.
What are those two palavering about over there?
de Guermantes asked Mme de Villeparisis, pointing to M.
de Norpois and Bloch.
The Dreyfus case.
The devil they are.
I give you a thousand guesses.
My nephew Robert!
he said at last.
That’s got nothing to do with it.
I’m sorry, but there it is.
Under this law M.
She has infected Robert with her way of thinking.
One says mentality.
Meanwhile, having heard Bloch’s name, he watched him question M.
Indeed, said the Duke, mentality,’ you say.
I like mentality.
Some time ago I read that a writer was talentuous.
Damned if I know what it means.
And since then I’ve never come across the word again.
I who am not even invited to dine with M.
I thought it was the Prime Minister’s wife, said M.
I went to see Marie-Aynard a couple of days ago.
It used to be so nice there.
It really is a bit stiff!
The intellectuals, that’s the shibboleth of those gentlemen.
What idiotic, turgid letters he writes from his island!
I don’t know whether M.
That can’t be very welcome to the supporters of M.
What a pity for them that they can’t swap innocents.
Everyone burst out laughing.
Did you hear what Oriane said?
the Duc de Guermantes inquired eagerly of Mme de Villeparisis.
Yes, I thought it most amusing.
I set no store by wit.
He doesn’t believe a word he says, murmured the Duchess.
I learned there to value logic more than anything else.
That’s probably why I wasn’t reelected.
Amusing things leave me cold.
Please let me finish.
Meanwhile Bloch was trying to pin M.
de Norpois down on Colonel Picquart.
There can be no question, replied M.
Perhaps the reason why M.
But where Bloch was mistaken was in assuming that M.
For Bloch had no doubt that M.
de Norpois knew the truth as to all these matters.
All that Bloch could elicit from M.
But those documents are obviously fake, said Bloch.
On the other hand, M.
You think Chartres is for Dreyfus?
Not at all.
You aren’t going to Mme de Sagan’s ball this evening?
We ourselves were inclined to be a bit romantic.
de Norpois considered that the conversation had lasted long enough.
You’re going, all of you, I suppose?
de Châtellerault, his friend and Bloch.
In fact, they came specially to invite me.
They being the Princesse de Sagan.
Aren’t they rather bad form, rather stuck-up snobs, these Sagans?
he inquired in a sarcastic tone of voice.
d’Argencourt, who adopted all the witticisms of Parisian society.
Besides, society isn’t my forte.
He continued, to the desperation of M.
Gérault-Richard and company.
Cock and bull stories will no longer suffice.
We must appoint judges to try Dreyfus.
Should you fail to disarm, M.
Are you the prisoner of those who foment disorder?
Have you given them pledges?
Bloch was at a loss for an answer.
de Norpois gave him no time.
As to that, there can be no question whatever.
The Government will accept all your suggestions.
You, sir, said Bloch, turning to M.
Everyone is, abroad.
Bloch coloured; M.
Mme de Guermantes muttered something in M.
To retrieve himself, Bloch turned to the Duc de Châtellerault.
Who told you?
as though he had been the son of a convict.
du Paty de Clam or M.
Judet’s article in the Petit Journal.
Mme de Villeparisis was shocked.
Good-bye, Madame, shouted Bloch.
Then she turned, overflowing with restored vitality, towards M.
You were speaking just now of The Seven Princesses, Duchess.
object is a compatriot of mine, said M.
Yes, he’s a Belgian, by nationality, he went on.
I don’t know if you’ve seen Borelli’s play.
But The Seven Princesses!
Mme de Marsantes attended Brunetière’s lectures.
She was a great lady.
She was, people said, the perfect Christian.
I thought I’d better warn you, to avoid any unpleasantness.
It’s Swann’s wife.
Thank you for warning me, said the Duchess.
It would indeed be most disagreeable.
Have you been invited to Lady Israels’s?
Mme de Villeparisis asked the Duchess, to change the subject.
You must ask Marie-Aynard.
She knows her.
I never could make out why.
I confess my sins.
But I have decided not to know her any more.
Besides, we have all been too trusting, too hospitable.
I shall never go near anyone of that race again.
And now we see what thanks we get from them.
d’Argencourt to Robert.
But, talking of Robert, haven’t you seen him?
she asked Mme de Villeparisis.
But I haven’t even had a word from him.
I don’t think I’ve seen him since Balbec.
Well, talk of the Saint!
said Mme de Guermantes.
What, you’ve come!
What a surprise!
Delicious, isn’t it?
Good evening, Robert, she said.
Well, so this is how we forget our aunt.
Good evening, how are you?
was her greeting.
He’s not very well just now, he gets rather tired.
I’m most flattered.
We were both silent.
It’s so good for one, a walk.
I shall stay at home now that I’ve got Robert.
Corona,’ they’re called.
I’ve none in the house.
Robert came up to us.
He had caught only the name of Mme de Saint-Ferréol.
Who in the world is Mme de Saint-Ferréol?
She’s Vermandois’s sister.
What, she’s Vermandois’s sister, I had no idea.
de Norpois that he had arrived.
But I’ve found out all about him.
He’s anti-semitism personified.
He knew that M.
I should be most happy!
But Prince von Faffenheim was no simpleton.
de Norpois to receive the Order of Saint Andrew.
Personally, I deplore this.
That’s not what he wanted.
This was a kind of reasoning of which M.
de Norpois and Prince von Faffenheim had frequently to deal.
The ponce furnishes more striking examples.
The following winter the Prince was seriously ill.
He recovered, but his heart was permanently affected.
That really would be disagreeable.
de Norpois in the most flattering terms.
The latter called upon him to thank him.
and, feeling somewhat out of breath as he showed M.
We must hurry up.
That evening, he met M.
de Norpois again at the Opéra.
Well now, you will think me highly indiscreet.
This person is called the Marquise de Villeparisis.
He raised certain objections.
Come that evening, at six, to Mme de Villeparisis’s.
My profound disillusionment occurred when he spoke.
Monsieur, said Mme de Villeparisis to M.
And she rose without bidding me good-bye.
She’s an ex-whore.
Hallo, here’s my uncle Palamède.
I soon discovered that Morel’s son was extremely go-getting.
I mentioned one.
The poet, taking offence, made no reply.
These tête-à-têtes, generally with some royal lady, secured for M.
de Charlus various privileges which he cherished.
He received two thousand nine hundred and ninety-odd francs.
Ah, well, if it was intentional, that’s fine, said M.
No, no, there was no mistake.
Actually you were quite right, M.
de Charlus concluded gaily, stooping to kiss his aunt’s hand.
I shall disgrace you publicly.
This sort of intermittent quarrel is of course somewhat exceptional.
Of a different order again were those of M.
To the pure all things are pure!
I studied M.
I then turned to M.
What a pleasant man M.
He’s quite right, she replied.
I’m sure this is what M.
It appears that M.
Did you see the Duchesse de Guermantes just now?
I asked Mme Swann.
de Norpois also presented me in the most glowing terms.
Mme de Villeparisis appealed to M.
Isn’t it true, M.
Whether from independence or because he was tired, M.
I guessed at once that this was Legrandin.
I remember so well M.
de Salvandy, M.
Doudan, getting him to talk about flowers.
Can we dine together tomorrow?
I met him just now on the doorstep.
I do not think that Robert was altogether mistaken.
She wonders whether you have anything against her.
In that case, he knew M.
de Marsantes there before our marriage, she told me.
It’s incredible, Bloch would have thought.
I was hurrying after him when M.
I shall be leaving soon.
Will you walk a short way with me?
I shall only keep you for a moment.
You’d better take care, Monsieur, I warned him.
You have picked up the wrong hat by mistake.
So I did not pursue the matter.
He’s talking to that idiotic Duc de Guermantes, I added.
you think that would interest M.
Who’s talking about M.
said the Baron in an insolent tone.
Go to Robert.
She had a very hard time when she was young.
And she’s so fond of me—what must she be thinking?
How wretched she must be feeling now!
What one suffers oneself one knows—it’s nothing.
But one can’t tell yet.
Besides, her decision may be irrevocable.
Robert swept me back to his mother.
Good-bye, he said to her.
I’ve got to go now.
I don’t know when I shall get leave again.
Probably not for a month.
I shall write to you as soon as I know.
What, Robert, you’re going off?
You see, Monsieur, mothers are such selfish creatures.
I accompanied her there.
No, he’s gone.
It’s too late.
We returned to the drawing-room.
She’s an enigma, that Rachel, a regular sphinx.
He was ignorant of almost all these infidelities.
She’s a swindler pure and simple.
With her it’s fifty thousand francs or nothing.
Mme de Marsantes bade me good-bye anxiously.
Those feelings concerned Robert, and she was sincere.
I can’t leave at once.
I must wait for M.
I’m going with him.
Mme de Villeparisis overheard these last words.
They appeared to vex her.
But this hypothesis never even entered my mind.
You’re leaving here with my nephew Palamède?
she asked me.
He is talking to M.
He’s already forgotten what he said to you.
Next to her M.
de Guermantes, superb and Olympian, was ponderously seated.
de Guermantes, over the body of M.
It was M.
he asked dryly, when we were in the courtyard.
We’ll walk until I find a cab that suits me.
You wished to speak to me, Monsieur?
That sort of politeness means nothing, he rebuked me coldly.
That is the whole question.
You must know yourself a little.
Are you worth my trouble or not?
de Charlus immediately dismissed them.
This was a favourite expression of M.
de Charlus was for or against Dreyfus.
I replied that Bloch was French.
Indeed, said M.
de Charlus, I took him to be a Jew.
His assertion of this incompatibility made me suppose that M.
de Charlus was more anti-Dreyfusard than anyone I had met.
In any case, the crime is non-existent.
But enough of that.
You might perhaps arrange that, and even some comic exhibitions.
That would make quite an amusing farce.
As he poured out these terrible, almost insane words, M.
de Charlus squeezed my arm until it hurt.
de Charlus seemed annoyed.
At this point I caught sight of M.
Introduce him to me!
But you must have singularly little idea of social values!
I might go so far as to express my satisfaction.
In any event M.
Bloch paid no attention to us.
Bloch to her feet.
A charming promiscuity!
Bernard, he had said proudly to M.
This frivolity in M.
I remarked on the resemblance.
Yes, my dear sir, that is a fact.
It was a form of insanity.
He was cured of it.
The most learned stomach specialists treated him, to no avail.
But my cousin also had nephritis.
My own would gain in return.
It was M.
de Charlus who had hurriedly withdrawn his arm from mine.
d’Argencourt emerging from a side street.
But it was as though M.
And fearing perhaps that M.
d’Argencourt had not recognised me, M.
Nevertheless I observed that M.
I’m sorry about that, said M.
The Duchesse de Guermantes seems to be very intelligent.
We were talking this afternoon about the possibility of war.
It appears that she is especially knowledgeable on that subject.
She is nothing of the sort, replied M.
de Charlus tartly.
At present you are a catechumen.
There was something scandalous about your presence up there.
You must at all costs avoid impropriety.
Dear me, it’s not an easy question to answer, M.
The picture dealers manufacture new ones for her every year.
She did not cease to be charming to us all.
At present, M.
Moreover, you must be particularly careful in choosing your friends.
But your choice of men friends is more important.
A proof of innocence in their eyes.
At that moment a cab passed, zigzagging along the street.
de Charlus instantly stopped him.
Which way are you going?
This surprised me, for M.
Well, I don’t want to get up on the box.
D’you mind if I stay inside?
No, but lower the hood.
Well, think over my proposal, said M.
Write to me.
Anyway, bear in mind what I’m offering you.
I’ll do it myself.
de Norpois, but in another form, brief, inverted and cruel.
Perhaps this rationalist crowd-manipulator was himself manipulated by his ancestry.
The concierge looked on.
You’re sure it’s not what they call a diplomatic illness?
to soothe his patient’s restlessness by a milk diet.
Cottard had told us to take her temperature.
A thermometer was fetched.
It seemed dead.
The little glass pipe was slipped into my grandmother’s mouth.
For the first time we felt some anxiety.
We had not brought the thermometer down below 99.
This won’t last for ever.
And then where will it have got you?
Ah, I don’t know about that.
and I stuck to that.
Ah yes, indeed, Madame, he’s splendid.
How right you are to admire him!
But which of his books do you prefer?
Why, yes, perhaps that is the best after all.
Claire is quite charming in it.
Which of his male characters appeals to you most?
But, Doctor, I have a temperature.
Not just now at any rate.
Besides, what a splendid excuse!
But I have a little albumin as well.
You ought not to know anything about that.
The laurel will be beneficial to your health.
On the contrary, the wind always keeps me wide awake.
But doctors are touchy people.
You have others, but not that particular one.
Yesterday I visited a home for neurasthenics.
Which he would, in fact, have done.
Submit to being called a neurotic.
You thought you were ill, dangerously ill, perhaps.
And you were not mistaken; they were there.
Neurosis has a genius for mimicry.
There is no illness which it cannot counterfeit perfectly.
Ah, do not think that I am mocking your sufferings.
But, Doctor, ought I to take a similar cure?
asked my grandmother, aghast.
It is not necessary, Madame.
The symptoms you betray here will vanish at my bidding.
That is your malady itself, your nervous hyperactivity.
All I need do is to control it.
I see on your table there one of Bergotte’s books.
No, I have nothing to say against your nervous energy.
It must reverse its engines.
Don’t tell me that you feel tired.
Tiredness is the organic realisation of a preconceived idea.
Begin by not thinking it.
de Talleyrand astutely called imaginary good health.
See, it has begun to cure you already.
Well, Madame, I shall now bid you good-day.
Françoise annoyed me by refusing to share in our joy.
de Guermantes, in spite of every effort, broke them.
I look rather wretched in this one.
But I do not think she recognised me.
So you’re still here, he was saying.
You don’t think of retiring?
And why should I retire, Monsieur?
There was one day he didn’t come.
I did what I could to cheer him up.
You’re sure you won’t?
she persisted, smiling.
I’ve nothing vacant, Madame.
Will they be long?
I’m not sorry to lose her couple of sous.
I was afraid that she might be feeling sick again.
I asked her.
in what courtly terms those things were put!
She smiled at me sorrowfully and gripped my hand.
She was not yet dead.
But I was already alone.
Besides, this is not my day for seeing patients.
You surely have a doctor of your own.
Call at your house!
Really, Monsieur, you can’t mean such a thing.
I’m dining with the Minister of Commerce.
I have a call to pay first.
Would you please oblige me by not touching the lift-buttons.
Getting that buttonhole made means more delay.
It’s of no importance.
But would it have been really true?
Is he a malefactor?
One morning, we can no longer hear him.
He has gone.
if only it were for ever!
In the evening he has returned.
What are his plans?
They are only third parties.
I then remembered that M.
Your grandmother is doomed, he said to me.
It is a stroke brought on by uraemia.
At all events, with Cottard you’re in excellent hands.
And he graciously offered me his hand.
This would take another ten minutes.
Each of us is indeed alone.
We set off homewards.
At length we arrived at the house.
So this is all the pity you show your mother!
True, his intention was to dazzle them.
or merely How are you keeping?
Because of her acute pain my grandmother was given morphine.
But the work was not yet completed.
My grandmother refused point-blank to let herself be examined.
Don’t put it off too long.
I’ll soon clear it for you with a hot needle.
Of course we paid no attention whatsoever.
And yet we asked ourselves: Clear it of what?
Each of us had his or her catarrh.
Informed by telegram, her sisters declined to leave Combray.
The effulgence of his name stops short at his gravestone.
But for Bergotte the antithesis was still incomplete.
He existed still sufficiently to suffer from the tumult.
I spoke to the latter of the new writer.
He read scarcely anything.
This man had been sent for before my grandmother’s illness.
For some days she could not see at all.
For several days my grandmother was deaf.
She made no effort to think.
Then came a state of perpetual agitation.
She was incessantly trying to get up.
It must be relieved in some way.
Cottard was in two minds.
I wasn’t asleep, I answered as I awoke.
I said this in good faith.
But then our actual awakenings produce an interruption of memory.
We went into the sickroom.
I have just, my dear sir, heard your macabre news.
I pleaded the difficulty of disturbing him for the moment.
Have you sent for Dieulafoy?
That was a grave error.
His advice did not in the least surprise me.
I should have liked to conceal him, no matter where.
going slightly off pitch on the word mother.
I say, this is a piece of luck!
As your friend M.
Bloch would say, it’s rather droll.
I had left the room for a few minutes.
Promise me that you won’t come tomorrow.
Please, for her sake.
At any rate, you won’t go all the way.
It’s what she would have wished.
Nothing, answered the cousin.
Where did you say the weather was bad?
asked my grandfather.
Talking of Combray, has anyone remembered to tell Legrandin?
At this point my father hurried from the room.
It was simply that Dr Dieulafoy had just arrived.
Dieulafoy, one thought one was in a Molière play.
For he was the embodiment of tact, intelligence and kindness.
The eminent man is no longer with us.
Mamma had not even noticed M.
Dieulafoy: everything that was not my grandmother no longer existed.
my grandfather asked the cousin.
Yes, Beethoven, I’ve been told.
It’s worth framing.
Still, I’m not surprised.
We mustn’t blame them.
They’re stark mad, both of them, as I’ve always said.
What’s the matter now?
Aren’t you going on with the oxygen?
The doctor reassured her: Oh, no!
We can begin it again presently.
The hiss of the oxygen ceased for a few moments.
One can never be sure, replied the doctor.
Françoise could not withstand this sight and burst out sobbing.
At that moment my grandmother opened her eyes.
My grandmother was dead.
A smile seemed to be hovering on my grandmother’s lips.
There was no one else in the house but Françoise.
The fog had lifted.
I had grasped at once what must have happened.
And the dancing-master?
And the pastry-cook?
With Albertine, however, there was something more than this.
But now she was scarcely recognisable.
This time, Albertine had returned to Paris earlier than usual.
But I am anticipating the course of years.
It was a long time since I had seen her.
These lasted often for quite a time.
Sophocles ought to have begun: Sir.
Here, however, Albertine was unable to follow me.
All this is drawn from the social treasury.
Lapse of time seemed to me to augur better still.
Yes, answered Albertine, she reminds me of a little mousmé.
You know, I’m not in the least ticklish.
I assure you.
Would you like me to try?
she inquired with womanly meekness.
No, further in.
You’re sure I’m not too heavy?
Albertine’s face did not suffer by this illumination.
What, the lamp already?
Heavens, how bright it is!
Do you want me to extinglish it?
Do you know what I’m afraid of?
I asked her.
That would be a happy misfortune.
I did not respond at once to this invitation.
And yet it was highly gratifying to me, this invitation.
Only you mustn’t forget that you’ve said I may.
I want a voucher: Valid for one kiss.
Do I have to sign it?
Tell me, just one thing more.
No, I don’t remember at all.
Gisèle was the one we saw least of.
Oh, is that all?
For all I knew, you might have meant mischief.
This argument left me perplexed.
The exact opposite happened.
Oh, but that doesn’t matter in the least.
I’ve got plenty of time.
What nice hair you have; what nice eyes—you’re sweet.
I always believe you.
You’re a friend of Robert Forestier and Suzanne Delage.
For a moment these names conveyed absolutely nothing to me.
I often pass Suzanne Delage in the Avenue de Messine.
I admire her style.
Of course there are exceptions.
But that is only an exception.
What are you laughing at?
I’m not laughing, I’m smiling at you, she replied tenderly.
When am I going to see you again?
But just at present it’s impracticable.
You needn’t see me if you’re busy.
You’re becoming a laughing-stock.
Sweet sister of the angels, far from me.
And then it was over.
In the next it was the other way about.
Quite half of the human race was in tears.
Jupien could have hoped for nothing better.
Indeed, since Jupien, finding the rent that M.
Often, on these excursions, I met M.
Have you any news of Robert?
At that moment Mme de Villeparisis entered the room.
You wouldn’t care to dine with her here on Wednesday?
I therefore declined this invitation also.
Ah, you’re not an easy person to get hold of.
Why do you never come to see me?
Whereupon they hastened to spread abroad this intelligence.
It would be so nice.
But the Guermantes door did not suffer from that.
She thought only of his real merits.
Both Mme de Villeparisis and Saint-Loup had testified to mine.
Oh, she’s charming!
the Duchess would say in an assured and judicious tone.
She was dying to be invited to her house.
I cannot say.
What, so you know Palamède, do you?
Let me remark in passing that M.
Now on this point M.
What a humbug Mémé is!
de Charlus must be a little mad.
Why are you so offensive?
Do you really mean my brother-in-law Palamède?
I replied that I was absolutely sure, and that M.
de Charlus must have misheard my name.
You aren’t going on there?
You don’t care for parties?
You’re very wise, they’re too boring for words.
If only I didn’t have to go!
But she’s my cousin; it wouldn’t be polite.
Good-bye then; I look forward to seeing you on Friday.
d’Argencourt was all very well.
But as soon as M.
We pursue the reality.
Shall it be this woman or another?
Nothing of the sort.
Mind you, I’ve nothing particular to say to you.
You just say that out of politeness.
I don’t want to have you catching a chill.
Nothing has happened in the interval.
Do you think we shall be successful?
I decided to send a carriage for Mme de Stermaria.
But he had a letter in his hand.
As soon as he had gone I opened the envelope.
Had been so looking forward to it.
Will write you a proper letter from Stermaria.
I picked them up, and tried to analyse her message.
I ought to have lighted up.
Circumstances decided against me; I did not see her again.
May I come in?
Françoise told me you might be in the dining-room.
But those hours are not altogether wasted.
The ideas that had appeared before me took flight.
And I found myself thrown back upon friendship.
I was astounded.
The new arrivals had the greatest difficulty in keeping silence.
The proprietor himself lost all sense of social distinctions: M.
Three times—fancy that!
said the barrister, touching his hat.
So you like the idea of marriage, do you, Bibi?
So you think it’ll be fun, being married, do you?
In the time taken up by this response M.
They became once more M.
le Prince this, M.
le Duc that, and were judged only by their quarterings.
Besides, this evening was somehow exceptional.
But the Prince had already vanished into the smaller room.
Quick, send Cyprien here, a table for M.
And with the door wide open too?
Why did you move?
Would you sooner dine here than in the little room?
Why, my poor fellow, you’re freezing.
This very instant, Monsieur le Marquis.
Yes, hot, excellent.
Like stockbrokers, doctors employ the first person singular.
Meanwhile I looked as follows.
That doesn’t matter in the least.
It is always a pleasure to do anything for M.
But you must decide, said Saint-Loup to me.
Foix is a good fellow.
Yes, I know, said Saint-Loup.
I wanted to tell Robert that M.
Certainly, Monsieur le Baron!
Oh, beg pardon, Monsieur le Comte!
I promised I’d send you round to him tomorrow evening.
I was just going to speak to you about him.
But tomorrow evening I’m dining out with your aunt Guermantes.
Yes, there’s a full-scale blow-out tomorrow at Oriane’s.
I’m not asked.
But my uncle Palamède doesn’t want you to go there.
You can’t get out of it, I suppose?
Well, anyhow, go on to my uncle’s afterwards.
I think he’s very anxious to see you.
Surely you could manage to get there by eleven.
Eleven o’clock, don’t forget.
I’ll let him know.
He’s very touchy.
If you don’t turn up he’ll never forgive you.
And Oriane’s parties are always over quite early.
But don’t say anything about it to her.
Interesting place, Morocco.
I could tell you all sorts of things.
Very fine lot of men out there.
One feels they’re on one’s own level, mentally.
But the Kaiser is out for peace.
Pure bluff, you know, like poker.
So then we give in.
Only it wouldn’t last so long.
If so, he was mistaken.
Let me help you off with your duds.
The people of bygone ages seem infinitely remote from us.
Offered as a translation, it seems a masterpiece.
The past is not fugitive, it stays put.
For I did not go there at once.
I am at your service.
Elstir a friend of yours, then?
There was something enchanting about this waterside carnival.
de Charlus’s by eleven.
de Guermantes in a bad humour.
No sooner had I entered the drawing-room than M.
She was a royal personage.
As for M.
Her amiability sprang from two causes.
On the contrary, you must be kind to the lowly.
Be helpful to the needy.
But there it flourishes only in isolation.
Mme de Courvoisier averred that M.
To cap it all, M.
For a moment the name of M.
Widor not prominent enough to be received.
de Guermantes, and gave M.
d’Agrigente my name.
But, uncle, the eldest girl married M.
I don’t call that a husband!
Not that M.
This courtesy excluded a large number of people.
When he wished to give pleasure to someone, M.
Only, though she might feign deafness, she was not dumb.
But towards these the indignation of the Courvoisiers was unrelenting.
a line which for that matter was unknown to her.
Thanks to the gods!
Mischance outstrips my esperance.
The Guermantes manners were not absolutely uniform throughout the family.
I won’t tolerate that sort of thing in my house!
Certainly from the moral standpoint Rachel was not altogether satisfactory.
de Bréauté as a snob.
Babal a snob!
Even in my house!
Oh, well, I dare say she ought to have.
Besides, Your Highness knows her.
We’ll save her a great deal of strain and agitation.
She goes everywhere, moves in the most brilliant circles.
Mme de Souvré would be bored to death.
No doubt this satisfaction had its drawbacks also.
But these cases were rare.
I feel I’m listening to him.
Oriane, do give us a little more Limoges!
These visits were an event.
But no, why?
But you may want to talk to each other.
Really, you’re in a hurry?
Your cousin Hedwige de Ligne.
I could do without having such a witty wife.
But we’ve no idea!
One of Oriane’s puns?
It’s sure to be delicious.
Oh, do tell us!
Seriously, I’m very fond of my brother.
I don’t understand you.
You’re being horribly tantalising.
What’s it all about?
Oh, obviously nothing serious!
He’s such a teaser, Charlus,’ was what they actually said.
Then he must be Teaser Augustus!
And then, you see, I’m more circumspect than my wife.
You hadn’t heard Teaser Augustus’?
the Princesse d’Epinay would ask.
has Oriane been here?
What do you think of Oriane’s latest?
One alone remained on the evening of Teaser Augustus.
People couldn’t make more fuss about a queen.
After all, what is Oriane?
And finally, he enjoyed bringing out his wife’s wit.
de Guermantes excelled.
occupy less room than a hemistich in an alexandrine.
For instance in the days when M.
MONSIEUR DE GUERMANTES—BOUILLON, PRINCE DES LAUMES: This is serious!
I have nothing to do with him, said the Duchess.
cried Mme de Gallardon.
but You know Oriane’s latest?
Isn’t that pure Oriane?
Presently the Duchess grew tired of them.
Another mistress was in the offing.
No doubt the love which M.
But during a period of transition, the woman whom M.
The Duke would begin to take a dislike to her.
At this moment M.
He made what excuses he could.
But Mme de Grouchy was not a Guermantes for nothing.
But you seem to be a regular Nimrod!
She insisted that M.
Basin and I can’t eat a dozen pheasants by ourselves.
No, tomorrow suits me better, the Duchess insisted.
But the day after, Poullein’s sweetheart would not be free.
He had no interest in going out then.
That’s just it.
Oh, nothing so very wonderful.
But I think they all like me.
That one is a little irritating because he’s in love.
At this point Poullein reappeared.
You’re quite right, said M.
de Grouchy, he doesn’t look very cheerful.
I admit I’m not a very dreadful mistress.
de Grouchy, for envy makes men blind.
they tell me she has a spiteful tongue.
Mme de Guermantes began to laugh.
Gradually the Princess became aware of their pantomime.
she stammered with growing uneasiness.
Does he think she’s too malicious?
inquired the Princess briskly.
Oh, dear me, no!
replied the Duchess.
sighed Mme de Parme, greatly relieved.
I must say I’d never noticed it either.
asked the stupefied Princess.
But isn’t she?
Superior in chest measurement, at any rate.
But she’s the best woman in the world.
It’s delicious, she put in.
de Guermantes explained the joke to me.
Teaser Augustus’ isn’t bad, said M.
Do tell me!
Now, Basin, you keep quiet.
She’s one of Basin’s cousins.
How well she expresses herself!
Yes, I know, she’s terribly close-fisted, broke in the Princess.
Which gives rise to some quite amusing scenes, M.
de Bréauté interrupted him.
That doesn’t surprise me!
she shouted after him.
And that evening I heard her asking the butler: Well?
What about the beef that was left over yesterday?
Aren’t you going to let us have that?
I don’t know any house where one eats better.
Or less, put in the Duchess.
One doesn’t outrun one’s appetite.
It’s certainly more healthy than sumptuous.
Seven little bouchées!
Then we shall be eight’—it’s exquisite.
How very well phrased!
But, my dear, you’re telling me nothing new.
I’m very proud that Ma’am should appreciate my humble phrasings.
The archives of the château would interest you.
She owns all M.
Surely, Oriane, said M.
de Bornier sitting next to you!
What’s the name of that author who wrote Salammbô?
Gad, it’s infernally dull, that Fille de Roland, said M.
de Guermantes who was still on the subject of M.
have you got something against him?
You’ve obviously got a grudge against him.
What did he do to you?
You must tell us.
That’s the sort of thing I like.
As for Wagner, he sends me to sleep at once.
You’re wrong there, said Mme de Guermantes.
In spite of his insufferable long-windedness, Wagner was a genius.
Lohengrin is a masterpiece.
Aren’t I right, Babal, said M.
de Guermantes, turning to M.
Are all of them held in this charming haunt.
It’s the same thing in literature.
Keep it for some evening when Mémé’s here.
He’s even better, he knows it all by heart.
I had missed the opening sentences of this little lecture.
Applauds with loud cries .
She has become literary since she’s been forsaken.
But she drives him mad and I’m not surprised.
life is really too tedious!
the Duchess languorously concluded.
Mme d’Arpajon bored M.
You mustn’t expect to launch that young genius.
Everybody knows that he has talent.
Less quickly than in our hearts!
Poor woman, I feel sorry for her!
said the Princesse de Parme to Mme de Guermantes.
But let me give you an example.
Only yesterday she made a terrible scene with Basin.
Is that the behaviour of a woman in love?
Oriane is really extraordinary.
She can talk about anything, she has read everything.
This young man must be quite captivated.
It was he who accustomed us to ugliness in literature.
There’s quite enough ugliness in life already.
Victor Hugo is not so realistic as Zola though, surely?
asked the Princesse de Parme.
She’s a charming person, and so fond of you.
She met you in Scotland.
I fancy she’s slightly under the influence of Bacchus.
But Zola is not a realist, Ma’am, he’s a poet!
But he makes it into something colossal.
His is the epic dungheap!
He is the Homer of the sewers!
He writes it with a big C’, exclaimed Mme d’Arpajon.
I asked M.
Swann would be able to tell you.
But tell me, you seem quite gone on his pictures.
In fact it was in the house for several days.
But I must say I refused to swallow M.
He wanted three hundred francs for them.
Three hundred francs for a bundle of asparagus!
I thought it a bit stiff.
You have to take it or leave it.
But it’s not always lacking in talent.
Vibert we saw at the water-colour exhibition.
I believe you know M.
Elstir, the Duchess said to me.
As a man, he’s quite pleasant.
He’s intelligent, said the Duke.
Didn’t he once start a portrait of you, Oriane?
asked the Princesse de Parme.
It’s a ghastly thing; Basin wanted to have it destroyed.
Make a portrait of you look ghastly!
Why, then it can’t be a portrait, it’s a lie.
Because she knows nothing about pictures?
But she’s a very kind woman, isn’t she?
The Duke assumed an air of profound astonishment.
The Princess had never dreamed of doing such a thing.
They all believed him.
Babal always knows everything, exclaimed the Duchesse de Guermantes.
You can see the chicken in the egg.
Châtellerault did his best to break M.
At this point M.
de Guermantes coloured slightly.
It was absolutely killing.
And what answer did this M.
I can assure you M.
Bloch didn’t wait for any more, he fled.
It’s always so interesting at my aunt’s.
You astonish me!
Why, I saw all sorts of quite impossible-looking people!
It’s just what Mémé was saying to me only yesterday.
I conjectured that M.
de Guermantes gave M.
The Duke’s face darkened.
You’re very particular.
It isn’t the grief of a husband.
He has a woman’s heart, Mémé has!
What you say is absurd, M.
de Guermantes broke in sharply.
There’s nothing effeminate about Mémé.
Nobody could be more manly than he is.
It’s very charming, it’s a pleasure to hear him.
I believe he wants to ask you a favour.
The Duc de Guermantes knitted his Olympian brow.
Why didn’t he ask me himself?
It’s his veneer of knowledge that’s so terrible.
The way he goes on about Morocco, it’s frightful.
But I thought they’d broken it off, interrupted M.
That Rachel was speaking to me about you.
Why, that’s just what it was—Morocco!
exclaimed the Princess, flinging herself into this opening.
What on earth can he want in Morocco?
de Guermantes sternly.
He speaks Latin, the Duke went one better.
the Princess gasped.
On my word of honour!
cried the Princess, what a delicious creature she was!
You don’t understand?
I’m afraid I can’t, I’m going on to M.
de Charlus at eleven.
This reply seemed to me in no way offensive.
Oh, dear, no!
None at all!
You do always fly to extremes, Oriane, said M.
For whom, pray?
Is it a great grief to your Majesty?
I wish she could lose a sister every day!
I believe you know General de Monserfeuil.
The Princess explained what it was that Saint-Loup wanted.
Robert could get anything he wanted out of Monserfeuil.
Oriane has asked too many favours of Monserfeuil.
Obviously, the Duke concluded.
He has consoled himself by giving his wife another baby.
Is that poor Mme de Monserfeuil pregnant again?
cried the Princess.
Old friends of M.
It had a sort of ritual meaning.
Which meant that, every time, M.
d’Agrigente, by diminishing my ration, spoiled my pleasure.
d’Agrigente prevented me, regularly, from taking my fill of it.
In this respect, doubtless, the friends of M.
You would be wasting your breath.
The thing is, I believe M.
I’d have spoken to Saint-Joseph about it during dinner.
He has far more influence, and he’s a real worker.
But, as you see, he’s gone now.
I don’t think he could be anywhere better.
In spite of which I’m very fond of them.
I’m like the people who keep a lady dog.
I have to find a husband for my flowers.
Otherwise I shan’t have any young ones!
How very strange.
Do you mean to say that in nature … ?
But the odds are so enormous!
Yes, indeed, said M.
You have to know all the tricks of the trade.
Babal, you’re divine, you know everything, cried the Duchess.
We never had time to go very far.
Now that motor-cars have come in, it would be delightful.
Actually, though, there’s no need to go quite so far.
And that does the trick!
It’s lovely, isn’t it?
de Guermantes smiled.
The Iénas have the same armchair with Wedgwood medallions.
The Princesse de Parme remained silent.
But it’s quite true; your Highness hasn’t seen their collection.
You’d say it was a museum come to life.
de Mailly-Nesle, Prince d’Orange, and M.
de Charlus, Duc de Brabant.
But at the Iénas’ it really is hallucinating.
Your Highness really must.
They are very kind people, and no fools.
A good-looking boy, I believe?
No, he’s just like a tapir.
You feel that the polisher must call round every morning.
They say he’s a snob?
put in M.
cried the Duchess with extraordinary vivacity.
queried the Princess, to whom the word Etruscan conveyed little.
Well, you know, a little of both.
Indeed, said the Princess.
Basin was talking to you just now about Beethoven.
the Princess cried in alarm.
Nowadays nobody is in the least surprised by it.
It looks just like an Ingres!
Perhaps the Louvre isn’t quite the place for it.
And is the Grand Duchess well?
Yes; we talked about you.
de Norpois there?
Yes, said the General.
In fact he was talking about your Emperor.
Although Elstir has done a fine portrait of me.
You don’t know it?
He’s most interesting while one’s sitting to him.
He has made me like a little old woman.
What a gallery!
But the Duke was less erudite than arrogant.
You’ve been to Holland, and you never visited Haarlem!
cried the Duchess.
Quite so; his brother married my sister, said M.
But so far as M.
The Kaiser is a man of marvellous intelligence.
I didn’t find him at all simple!
I trust I’m not shocking you?
You set my mind at rest, said the Duchess.
If he weeps, they buy the piece for the Museum.
Norpois is in favour of an Anglo-French understanding, isn’t he?
What good would that do you?
The English are so schtubid.
The Queen is charming, excessively gentle and dim-witted.
With that, you would be invincible.
It would be more practical than the Anglo-French rapprochement M.
de Norpois preaches.
Remembering that M.
He would have said that he detested M.
de Norpois did not like me.
These slanders were frequent enough with him.
O Lord, forsook my bed for yours!
I was accompanied by Petite.
That doesn’t surprise me in the least.
But aren’t you even some sort of cousins?
asked General de Monserfeuil.
I seem to remember that Norpois married a La Rochefoucauld.
Really, how interesting; I never knew that, said the General.
However, went on M.
Mme de Guermantes drew me out of my meditation.
Really, I find all that sort of thing too deadly.
How could I have felt otherwise until now?
and Mme de Guermantes their lost poetry.
You are wrong to stand up for him, M.
de Guermantes told me, as Saint-Loup had told me before.
And I can speak with some knowledge, he’s Oriane’s cousin.
On the one hand, M.
She was at this period little received in society.
At once M.
He lives in the Rue Vaneau.
His mother was Mlle d’Uzès.
She tried to connect her friends with those of M.
de Guermantes by means of a detour.
I know quite well who you mean.
No, it’s not those ones, they’re cousins.
Then, from the lips of M.
At least the explosion of But she’s Oriane’s cousin!
The Ambassadress did not seem to care for this Princess.
She said to me in an undertone: She is stupid.
No, she’s not so beautiful as all that.
That reputation is usurped.
de Guermantes and M.
de Guermantes recall that M.
scarcely had he begun, or reported M.
de Luxembourg’s pretension that in his wife’s presence M.
I even had another snub.
He wasn’t always like that, she informed us.
I’m afraid, my dear fellow, you’d never get it in.
I should suggest that you take a goat-cart.
He’s in a very bad way now, poor Ornessan.
de Guermantes went on to explain that M.
and, on my demanding an explanation: I mean to say—verb.
So is their aunt Villeparisis.
Ah, now, her I adore!
She’s not only virtue itself but reserve itself.
They were not all of them important.
Thus, when M.
Plain commonsense enabled me to brush it aside.
I knew the formula.
The Princess came towards me.
what a good idea, she exclaimed, it’s so practical!
There’s a sensible man for you.
You’re independent of the weather, the Princess said to me.
What do you know about it, Madame?
It’s a physical impossibility.
Monsieur must have stout sealegs.
What’s bred in the bone!
Having escorted the Princesse de Parme to her carriage, M.
Now, in the carriage which was taking me to M.
Nor was she altogether wrong.
I felt so urgent a need for M.
There are still several people waiting to see him.
No; please don’t bother.
I had an appointment with M.
Oh no, sir, you mustn’t go away, cried the servant.
le Baron might be vexed.
I will try again.
de Charlus’s servants and their devotion to their master.
or Ducret, the nightshirt!
These histrionic trappings with which M.
The valet withdrew.
I supposed that M.
de Charlus would rise to greet me.
de Charlus’s face.
I took an armchair which was comparatively near.
so that is what you call a Louis XIV seat!
I who remembered with what a torrent of abuse M.
Some very pretty plaited garlands with ornaments, I told him.
I looked at M.
But I did not allow myself to be discouraged.
Our religion enjoins patience.
However, all this is now neither here nor there.
So far, I had never dreamed that M.
Some ill-wisher had invented the whole thing.
I protested to M.
de Charlus that I had said absolutely nothing about him.
But, as I say, one can always write.
And who says that I am offended?
de Charlus roared.
You are evidently not aware to whom you are speaking?
While he was speaking, my desire to persuade M.
This fury at the moment when M.
My anger had not calmed that of M.
Do you not know?
Do you retain no memory of the things you say?
So it’s impossible for you to tell me?
he said in a snarling voice.
Monsieur, I replied, moving away from him, you insult me.
Moreover, I cannot convince you.
So I’m lying!
Someone has misinformed you.
A different footman appeared.
Bring something to drink and order the brougham.
of course, yes.
Well, true or false, the remark has done its work.
My affection for you is quite dead.
Nothing can revive it.
I walked back through the big green drawing-room with him.
It’s a good thing to be fond of something.
The panelling is by Bagard.
You observe, it repeats the same decorative design.
On the whole it’s quite good.
Some pretty things, are there not?
But why am I telling you all this?
They don’t interest you; it’s as though you couldn’t see.
You hear: Beethoven has come to join him.
Ah, well, one doesn’t know.
One never does know.
It’s invisible music.
Pretty, isn’t it?
But you don’t care two hoots about it.
What, you don’t know how to shave!
Originally, I must confess that I found you quite insignificant.
No dissonance; before the eternal silence, the dominant chord!
But you don’t even know who Whistler is!
The Princesse de Guermantes’s house is really very beautiful.
Oh, it’s not very beautiful.
It’s the most beautiful thing in the world.
Next to the Princess herself, of course.
there’s no comparison.
But really she is incommensurable with her cousin.
And the Esther gardens alone!
Can one not visit them?
My role is at an end, sir.
I will simply add these few words.
Let the present example serve for your instruction.
Do not neglect it.
Affection is always precious.
Many of the things that M.
To which I may add that the pictures which M.
de Charlus made out.
How, in any case, could it be otherwise?
But the people in question are the same.
The fact remains that these differences do exist.
I call her a monster.
d’Haussonville, either M.
d’Harcourt or the Prince de Chalais.
Nor do I cite Venice at random.
de Guermantes whom I did not know.
But my wife’s too good-natured—she can’t resist obliging people.
She was on the contrary most alert.
I had touched upon one of those services which M.
and Mme de Guermantes were not fond of rendering.
You’ve not fallen foul of her in any way?
No, decidedly, I shall say nothing to her about it.
Anyhow, you’ll see her yourself in a minute.
de Guermantes had performed for my benefit.
Why, no, he replied with the air of a connoisseur.
Would you like to know what I think?
A footman came in.
Mme la Duchesse wishes to know if M.
le Duc will be so good as to see M.
Swann, as Mme la Duchesse is not quite ready.
Naturally my wife, who told him to come, isn’t ready.
I don’t know whether he’s been invited.
Otherwise you can imagine!
le Duc, he is not back yet.
Hell and damnation!
He sent for Le Temps, in which there was nothing.
de Charlus, the Marquis de Modène, M.
Charles Haas and Comte Louis de Turenne.
Besides, I expect Oriane won’t be long now.
And he showed his Velázquez to Swann.
You’ve probably seen it at Gilbert’s.
Oh, yes, of course, I remember.
What do you suppose it is?
Of course it is, said the Duke bluntly.
It’s Boson, the I forget how manyeth de Guermantes.
Not that I care a damn about that.
You know I’m not as feudal as my cousin.
Nnnnno, said Swann.
A bad joke!
Oh, that fellow!
I don’t even bother to consider him.
But the Duc de Guermantes is not anti-semitic?
not admiring his Mignard or whatever he calls it.
Yes, she is charming.
All the same, Robert de Saint-Loup is a Dreyfusard.
That gives me a great deal of pleasure.
It doesn’t surprise me, he’s highly intelligent.
It’s a great thing, that is.
No, no, I never told you anything of the sort.
You’re thinking of someone else.
You try, you’ll find you can’t struggle to the end.
What a difference from Clemenceau!
He’s a very great man, is old Clemenceau.
How he knows the language!
She was first and foremost against the frocks.
You see him occasionally?
I asked Swann, referring to Saint-Loup.
In spite of the Affair!
The question was never raised.
Mme de Guermantes rippled with laughter.
So my clothes please you?
What magnificent rubies!
I must say I’ve never seen anything quite like them.
They were a present from the Grand Duchess.
What’s on at the Princess’s?
What do you mean, Basin?
The whole world has been invited.
It will be a deathly crush.
You know them, of course.
You can’t imagine how lovely they were.
And then the fountain—really, it’s Versailles in Paris.
What sort of person is the Princess?
Come now, Oriane, what on earth are you saying?
broke in M.
Marie a fool?
Even her pronunciation gets on my nerves.
But I quite admit that she’s a charming loony.
It’s true that she chose him!
Still, that was quite enough of a good thing.
But it must not be forgotten that, politics apart, M.
I can’t understand how it hasn’t reached you.
They probably don’t approve of the Order of St John.
And she rang the bell.
Mme de Guermantes asked her husband.
But that one is amiable and intelligent, Swann remarked.
They must always have an opinion about everything.
When there’s no difference.
I don’t think he was any too well pleased, really.
There are evenings when one would sooner die!
A servant appeared.
le Marquis d’Osmond?
Most certainly not, nothing before tomorrow morning.
The footman’s face glowed with happiness.
Listen, Basin, let me do what I want.
she said to the despairing footman.
Another footman came into the room.
Why haven’t they brought up the package M.
Swann sent here?
Jules went round to inquire for news of M.
le Marquis d’Osmond: has he come back yet?
He’s just arrived this instant, M.
They’re expecting M.
le Marquis to pass away at any moment.
Ah, he’s alive!
exclaimed the Duke with a sigh of relief.
They’re expecting, are they?
Well, they can go on expecting.
One of them wanted to call again during the night.
The head one said it was no use.
Who the devil asked you for your opinion?
You haven’t understood a word of what they told you.
It wasn’t me they told, it was Jules.
Will you hold your tongue!
He’ll regain his strength gradually, don’t you know.
One mustn’t expect everything at once.
He rubbed his hands.
He’s alive; what more could anyone want?
Upon my word, I envy him having such a constitution.
We do too much inquiring.
It only tires him.
We must leave him room to breathe.
Swann sent me to be brought up here.
We’ve left it in the hall.
Does Madame la Duchesse wish me to bring it up?
What, this morning?
About ten o’clock, Madame la Duchesse.
Show me the cards.
de Guermantes,’ nobody would know who it was.
What an argument!
But, my dear Charles, I’m longing to see your photograph.
Extinctor draconis latrator Anubis, said Swann.
But I don’t understand why Anubis?
What’s the one like who was an ancestor of Babal?
I want to see them all, she added.
I’m less impatient, I must say, he added complacently.
But now we’re going to look at your photograph.
Open the envelope, she said to a footman.
In my room, of course.
I want to have it before my eyes.
And don’t crumple the envelope, either.
Even the envelope has to be respected!
Where on earth did you dig it up?
Madame, I’m very much afraid that it won’t be possible.
Mme de Montmorency is more fortunate.
You went with her to Venice and Vicenza.
Swann burst out laughing.
I’m not pleased with your colour.
What’s that you say?
You’re joking, she said to Swann.
I don’t know why I’m telling you this.
It’s not of any importance!
I expect they’ve frightened you quite unnecessarily.
You’ve kept on your black shoes!
With a red dress!
No, no, we have plenty of time.
And after all, what does it matter?
The Duchess went up to her room.
Well, said M.
I should have had my dinner at nine o’clock.
It’s not that she doesn’t like seeing you both.
On the contrary, she’s too fond of your company.
If she finds you still here she’ll start talking again.
Besides, I tell you frankly, I’m dying of hunger.
Five minutes to eight!
She’ll give us both indigestion before tomorrow.
She’s not nearly as strong as people think.
You’re as sound as a bell.
You’ll bury us all!
Bontemps [changed to: Mme Bontemps].
Political or professional hierarchies meant nothing.
How can one do good to people one doesn’t understand?
That’s what is so frightful.
asked the Prince.
I thought they were already very close.
Really, she can’t have any sense of the ridiculous.
Françoise holds court at lunch-time below stairs.
Jupien; his niece.
The Guermantes’ doormat: threshold of the Faubourg.
A gala evening at the Opéra.
Berma in Phèdre once more.
The Prince of Saxony?
The Faubourg Saint-Germain in their boxes.
Berma in a modern piece.
Berma and Elstir.
The Princesse and the Duchesse de Guermantes.
Mme de Cambremer.
Françoise’s impenetrable feelings.
The cavalry barracks.
The Captain, the Prince de Borodino.
Noises and silence.
My Doncières hotel.
The world of sleep.
The streets of Doncières in the evening.
Dinner at Saint-Loup’s pension.
I ask him to speak to his aunt about me.
He wants me to shine in front of his friends.
He denies the rumour of his engagement to Mlle d’Ambresac.
The Army and the Dreyfus case.
Aesthetics of the military art.
Saint-Loup and his mistress.
Captain deBorodino and his barber.
My grandmother’s voice on the telephone.
Saint-Loup’s strange salute.
Return to Paris.
End of winter.
Mme de Guermantes in lighter dresses.
Work-plans, constantly postponed.
Mme Sazerat a Dreyfusard.
Legrandin’s professed hatred of society.
Visit to the suburbs to meet Saint-Loup’s mistress.
I recognise her as Rachel when from the Lord.
Pear-trees in blossom.
Jealous scenes in the restaurant.
In the theatre after lunch.
Her transformation on stage.
Rachel and the dancer.
Saint-Loup and the journalist.
Saint-Loup and the passionate stranger.
An afternoon party at Mme de Villeparisis’s.
Her social decline; her literary qualities.
The social kaleidoscope and the Dreyfus case.
Mme de Villeparisis’s Memoirs.
The three Parcae.
The portrait of the Duchesse de Montmorency.
Legrandin in society.
Bloch’s bad manners.
Entry of M.
Entry of the Duc de Guermantes.
Norpois and my father’s candidature for the Academy.
Generality of psychological laws.
Various opinions on Rachel, on Odette, on Mme de Cambremer.
Norpois and the Dreyfus case.
The laws of the imagination and of language.
Mme de Villeparisis’s by-play with Bloch.
The Comtesse de Marsantes.
Entry of Robert de Saint-Loup.
Mme de Guermantes’s amiability towards me.
Norpois and Prince von Faffenheim.
Oriane refuses to meet Mme Swann.
Charlus and Odette.
Charlus’s strange behaviour to his aunt.
Mme de Marsantes and her son.
I learn that Charlus is the Duc de Guermantes’s brother.
The affair of the necklace.
Charlus offers to guide my life.
Terrible, almost insane remarks about the Bloch family.
d’Argencourt’s coldness towards me.
Strange choice of a cab.
The Dreyfus case below-stairs.
My grandmother’s illness.
Dr du Boulbon’s diagnosis.
Expedition to the Champs-Elysées with my grandmother.
My grandmother has a slight stroke.
My grandmother’s illness and death.
Your grandmother is doomed.
The specialist X——.
My grandmother’s sisters remain at Combray.
Visits from Bergotte, himself ill.
Time and the work of art.
The Grand Duke of Luxembourg.
The Duc de Guermantes.
My grandmother’s brother-in-law the monk.
My grandmother’s death.
Saint-Loup breaks with Rachel.
Mme de Stermaria’s divorce.
Visit from Albertine.
New words in her vocabulary.
Successive images of Albertine.
Charlus’s strange attitude towards Bloch.
Mme de Stermaria cancels our appointment.
Visit from Saint-Loup.
Reflections on friendship.
Memory of Doncières.
Night and fog.
A pure Frenchman.
An invitation from M.
Dinner with the Guermantes.
The Princesse de Parme.
The family genie.
The Princesse de Parme’s receptions.
The Guermantes salon.
The Duchess’s mimicry.
The handsome supernumeries.
Disillusionment with the Faubourg Saint-Germain.
Misunderstanding between a young dreamer and a society woman.
Why Saint-Loup will return to a dangerous post in Morocco.
The ritual orangeade.
The Duchess praises the Empire style.
The Guermantes divorced from the name Guermantes.
Norpois at once malicious and obliging.
The Turkish Ambassadress.
The poetry of genealogy.
Exaltation in the carriage on the way to M.
Waiting in M.
de Charlus’s drawing-room.
His strange welcome.
Gentleness succeeding rage.
He accompanies me home in his carriage.
Letter from the young footman to his cousin.
Invitation from the Princesse de Guermantes.
Remarkable discovery which will be described later.
The Duc de Bouillon.
The coins of the Order of Malta.
The Duc de Guermantes’s Philippe de Champaigne.
Swann greatly changed.
The Duke’s ball and Amanien’s illness.
The Duchess’s red shoes.
2 Françoise says avoir d’argent instead of avoir de l’argent.
It became a popular all-purpose catch-phrase.
John Mortimer translated it as How’s your father?
5 A somewhat inaccurate quotation from Pascal’s famous memorial.
7 Popular abbreviation of the newspaper l’Intransigeant.
11 La barbe has the colloquial meaning tedious or boring.
12 Duc Decazes: minister and favourite of Louis XVIII.
14 Qu’importe le flacon pourvu qu’on ait l’ivresse!
line is in fact by Alfred de Musset.
17 Quand on parle du Saint-Loup!
is what the Duchess says.
The pun doesn’t work in English.
Françoise says: Faut-il que j’éteinde?
instead of éteigne.
26 An aria from Hérold’s Le Pré-aux-Clercs.
27 A seventeenth-century poetess noted for rather mawkish verses.
REVISED BY D.
Copyright © 1993 by Random House, Inc.
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions.
Published in the United States by Random House, Inc.
and in Great Britain by Chatto & Windus.
Revisions by D.
Proust, Marcel, 1871-1922.
[Sodome et Gomorrhe.
Sodom and Gomorrah/Marcel Proust; translated by C.
Moncrieff and Terence Kilmartin; revised by D.
Includes bibliographical references.
Series: Proust, Marcel, 1871-1922.
I rather missed my Alpine eyrie.
de Charlus coming away from the Marquise’s door.
Only a few minutes had passed since his entry.
de Charlus a more spiritualised, above all a softer refinement.
For what did I see!
But, more astounding still, M.
I had not supposed that he could look so unappealing.
Try as M.
Whatever the point might be that held M.
At the same instant as M.
The laws of hospitality prevailed over the rules of coquetry.
I had lost sight of the bumblebee.
This was the most prudent method.
First of all, my impatience.
de Charlus had been, and how luck had favoured them.
I did not dare move.
But I was afraid of making a noise.
Besides, it was unnecessary.
Jupien refused with insistence the money that M.
de Charlus was trying to press upon him.
de Charlus took one step outside the shop.
It’s so becoming, a nice beard.
It’s disgusting, the Baron replied.
Still, if only it was just the Gare d’Orléans!
Rather curious, is it not?
No, my pet.
I don’t know who you mean.
Jupien filled in the portrait, but M.
cried Jupien, who had understood nothing of M.
I have three Popes in my family, replied M.
Fatuously prolonged, it sickens me.
I waited for him in vain.
Ulysses himself did not recognise Athena at first.
de Charlus been to Jupien.
Until that moment, in the presence of M.
Although in the person of M.
de Charlus looked like a woman: he was one!
They are different aspects of the same reality.
We shall speak of them when M.
de Charlus comes to know them.
For her my heart doth pine.
And, sure enough, the other takes a wife.
Then the solitary languishes alone.
For men like M.
As for M.
From this day onwards M.
Don’t forget you’ve already promised her to Jupien.
Admittedly, every man of M.
It is possible that they may return there one day.
If, for instance, she had remarked to M.
You don’t know M.
But from the first moment the usher had recognised him.
But now it was my turn to be announced.
Her brief uncertainty was agonising.
Less so perhaps than mine.
To do them honour all the angels rise.
de Charlus, talking to H.
the Duke of Sidonia, whose acquaintance he had just made.
de Charlus and M.
de Sidonia—without however discouraging him, for, whenever M.
I might well have asked M.
I suspected nothing of the sort.
He had been surprised to see me at the Guermantes’.
This was one of the reasons for his approaching me.
There was also another.
Your grandmother is dead, isn’t she?
The mistakes made by doctors are innumerable.
After all it’s a natural function.
But you mustn’t overdo it, you understand.
Excess in anything is wrong.
Medicine is not an exact science.
de Vaugoubert did nevertheless display.
But whereas M.
Give him a dressing-down in his own interest.
What he needs is a slice of humble pie.
de Vaugoubert, like M.
In my case, M.
And this irked me for two reasons.
Now there was more truth in this than was supposed.
Mme de Vaugoubert really was a man.
A former German Chancellor, Prince von Bülow, married an Italian.
Parties of this sort are as a rule premature.
He responded by naming each of them in turn.
Good evening, Madame de Brantes.
Good evening, Madame de Mecklembourg.
Have you brought your daughter?
Is she wearing that delicious pink frock?
Good evening, Saint-Géran.
True, there was an element of pride in this attitude.
It is even more probable that the German prince M.
Meanwhile I had to make up my mind.
The elegance of the setting mattered nothing.
I was rescued from my uncertainty by Mme de Souvré.
Good evening, she said, coming towards me.
Have you seen the Duchesse de Guermantes lately?
I remember very well.
Such is the cowardice of society people.
It was there none the less.
Here I was forced to subject myself to it.
It is not the name that has come to us.
It is indeed a pity, dear reader.
And what are they, may I ask?
He scarcely knows that he is asleep.
Well, did Mme d’Arpajon introduce you to the Prince?
I had no one else to turn to but M.
Good evening, Madame de Gallardon, M.
de Charlus replied.
More intelligent than the other Guermantes, M.
The imbecile, the scoundrel!
He barely smiled at me, addressed me gravely as Sir.
he inquired with a distant but interested air.
Bravo, old girl!
he cried, clapping his hands as though at the theatre.
It was to Mme de Souvré, was her reply.
Good evening, Antioche, good evening, Louis-René.
Have you been to look at the fountain?
Very pretty, is it not?
Have you seen my delicious cousin Oriane lately?
She’s coming tonight.
There’ll be every imaginable royalty—it will be most alarming.
What a delightful woman the Princess is!
What a superior person!
But there is no comparison, said the Ambassadress.
She had always thought so.
She was, above all, extremely useful.
The real stars of society are tired of appearing there.
In vain did sundry kind friends such as M.
He has just been given the last sacraments.
I know, I know, answered M.
The idea of supposing that you weren’t invited!
One’s always invited!
Besides, there was me.
I happened to arrive at that moment.
It was, in this particular instance, the voice of M.
de Vaugoubert talking to M.
de Vaugoubert, when talking to M.
de Charlus, appeared uncertain.
But, ambitious and timorous, M.
Certain names mentioned by M.
de Vaugoubert an exquisite surprise.
de Charlus, M.
How charming a modesty is depicted on their faces!
From that instant M.
de Vaugoubert greatly to the annoyance of M.
de Vaugoubert remained silent; I could only see his eyes.
At length M.
de Vaugoubert spoke, otherwise than with his eyes.
It is probable, replied M.
Oh, dear, no!
not in the least!
Then he has no right to look it so completely.
Besides, he has all the little tricks.
You’re entirely mistaken about him.
In any case he’s quite charming.
I’ve never been so moved.
That was the moment to tell him what you wanted.
Oh, good heavens!
What an idea!
If he were even to suspect such a thing!
But I have no fear in that direction.
I’ve been looking for you everywhere.
You must fix a day to come and see me.
There are some secrets which I cannot tell you here.
I shall keep one and give you the other two.
The Duc de Guermantes was not overpleased by these offers.
He, at any rate, was content to include M.
What, you don’t know these splendours?
This is an admirable house to visit.
As a sedative, that is not good enough.
Why, here comes Mme de Saint-Euverte.
We’ve just been dining with her.
But she can never miss a party.
One after another had ceased to be seen.
What cause had they for complaint?
And so, the following year, they were not invited.
ambassadresses, of the Duchesses d’Uzès, de La Trémoïlle, etc.
Not that the reports were mendacious.
The majority of the persons mentioned had indeed been present.
But there were others as well.
The Prince d’Agrigente—would he come?
And Mme de Durfort?
It looks as though there are people from every parish.
Mélanie Pourtalès arranged things far better.
And who in the world is that?
she asked with an air of astonishment, while M.
Why, it’s Mme de Chaussepierre, you were most impolite.
I’ve never heard of Chaussepierre.
Old mother Chanlivault’s nephew.
I haven’t the faintest idea what you’re talking about.
Oh, but I knew her mother quite well.
She was charming, extremely intelligent.
You say she calls herself Mme de Chaussepierre?
The Duke looked at her sternly.
They’re excellent people.
Basin, you are the joy of my life.
However, I must admit that Chaussepierre is not bad either.
You must have gone about collecting them, it’s not possible.
You won’t find anything better.
de Bréauté, while M.
de Vaugoubert fastened on M.
I know absolutely nothing about the matter.
I beg you to keep your curiosity to yourself.
It leaves me more than cold.
I believe this young man to be absolutely the opposite.
Do you know what it was about?
the Duke asked M.
It was a delightful show, I gather.
It was about this little performance, M.
It appears, though, M.
de Bréauté continued, that the little play was quite delightful.
Mme Molé was there, and she was immensely amused.
What, does Mme Molé go there?
said the Duchess in astonishment.
that must be Mémé’s doing.
Already, since M.
de Bréauté, is entirely unfounded.
I have good reason to know.
I shall not discuss politics with you, Froberville, said M.
I feel badly let down.
Ah, I’m glad you reminded me of him, exclaimed M.
I don’t give two straws for his opinion.
With a Frenchman it’s another matter.
It’s true that Swann is a Jew.
Now, Swann was that in every sense of the word.
And this is how he repays us!
I thought better of him.
But at heart she feels things with extraordinary keenness.
She was very fond of Swann; she was deeply grieved.
Am I not right, Oriane?
But still, that wasn’t quite the same thing as this.
The tone in which M.
It is true that M.
Don’t you see, M.
It’s a public menace.
People will say: Ab uno disce omnes.
You know that he’s nothing of the kind.
Mme de Villeparisis’s brother?
I asked, remembering that she had been Mlle de Bouillon.
Oriane, Mme de Lambresac is saying how-d’ye-do to you.
At this point a remark made by M.
Mme de Guermantes was miserable in the extreme.
Basin, she said, allow me to present to you M.
d’Herweck’s ill-timed request.
The whole of Paris will be there.
It’s shocking, but there it is.
de Bréauté smiled a subtle smile.
The delicate amusement of M.
de Froberville instantaneously experienced.
poor aunt Saint-Euverte, she’ll make herself sick over it!
No, the unhappy woman isn’t to have her duchess!
What a blow!
It’ll be the death of her!
And yet one never knows.
It’s most impressive and liturgical; quite Campo Santo!
The Duchess had moved away from Froberville.
He followed her: Just one word in your ear.
Slightly irritated, Well, what is it now?
she said to him stiffly.
Oh, good gracious!
said Oriane, who had a horror of diseases.
But that wouldn’t matter to me, I’ve had it already.
You can’t get it twice.
So the doctors say.
I know people who’ve had it four times.
Anyhow, you are warned.
They tell us that to entice us.
But I know all about it.
Full of respect though they were for M.
de Citri, whose great-grandmother had been an Aumale-Lorraine.
Goodness me, it depends on the mood.
But how deadly it can be!
Presently, everything became boring.
Beautiful things are such a bore.
enough to drive you mad.
Now, the figure to which M.
Swann had arrived at the age of the prophet.
The supposition was not necessary.
Hallo, old boy, I’m in Paris for forty-eight hours.
It was Saint-Loup.
I told him how greatly I admired the house.
Yes, it’s very much the historic monument.
Personally I find it deadly.
Leaving aside M.
Had he not very nearly been blackballed at the Jockey?
But are you sure that M.
de Charlus has had all those mistresses?
Then, however, he had still been in love and jealous.
all depends, though: where was it?
It will have to be my next leave, he said.
She looks to me a marvellous proposition.
The parents are always ill and can’t look after her.
Oh, when are you coming back?
I don’t know.
As soon as he saw her M.
You see, I wasn’t exaggerating, Robert said in my ear.
Just look at my uncle’s attentiveness to Mme de Surgis.
Though I must say it does surprise me.
If Oriane knew, she would be furious.
One is not always somebody’s nephew with impunity.
Which tangles the skein of family likenesses.
What were we talking about?
Oh yes, that big, fair girl, Mme Putbus’s maid.
I imagine her as being rather Giorgionesque?
And then one goes on to the next.
There’s something rather strange about those two young men.
Look at that curious passion for gambling, Marquise, said M.
Perhaps, too, M.
For that look was different from the looks which M.
Oh, how very odd!
Would you allow me to introduce them to you?
Mme de Surgis inquired timidly.
Arnulphe, Victurnien, come here at once, said Mme de Surgis.
Victurnien rose purposefully.
It’s the sons’ turn, now, muttered Saint-Loup.
It’s enough to make one die laughing.
It’s all the funnier as my uncle detests pretty boys.
And just look how seriously he’s listening to them.
How well brought-up they seem, what charming manners, M.
de Charlus was saying.
Do you think so?
Mme de Surgis replied, highly delighted.
In another minute they’ll be looking for the money-box!
He had not observed that M.
The General could not help wincing.
We heard the voice of M.
de Charlus in ecstasy at such a display of learning.
Not quite to that extent; you’re completely mistaken, Robert replied.
It was no affair of mine.
If you stay with M.
Swann for a moment, I shall be back presently.
I must go and talk to my aunt.
At last, said M.
de Charlus to Mme de Surgis.
No, I’m wrong in saying the first.
There are also a Polignac and a Montesquiou, added M.
I could not bring myself to leave Swann.
de Charlus and Mme de Surgis.
I’ll wait for you here.
And indeed M.
de Charlus with a mocking smile.
And yet who could be more interesting to listen to?
The proximity of the lady is enough.
They tell me that the indefatigable old street-walker gives garden-parties.
Are you going to wallow there?
I always admire people who make plans, she said.
I often change mine at the last moment.
I shall act upon the inspiration of the moment.
de Charlus had just made.
I remained serious.
But he doesn’t give me much encouragement.
He seems to avoid me.
This expression struck me as inadequate.
Try to find out, and come and tell me tomorrow.
Forgive and forget.
I give you a free hand.
In any case, I count upon you absolutely.
It’s really incredible, this spontaneous generation of falsehood.
People are very inquisitive.
And a lot I ever learned!
Are you jealous?
Well, you can count yourself lucky.
A little jealousy is not too unpleasant, for two reasons.
In between, it’s the most agonising torment.
But that makes no difference.
My attention was distracted by the conversation that M.
And are you a reader too?
What do you do?
While talking to Arnulphe, M.
No, Swann replied, I’m too tired to walk about.
Basin is all my girlhood!
And indeed it was partly true.
How is it?
What has become of it?
Oh, that little blue collar!
The painter was offended, she said to M.
de Charlus, and took it back.
He is talking to her about her portrait.
It’s quite true that he’s a charming friend.
This was the Henry document.
Soon I had no more doubts, and I couldn’t sleep.
exclaimed Swann, breaking off his narrative.
Forgive me for interrupting you, my boys.
And so I declined the invitation to supper.
At last we’re alone, he said.
I quite forget where I was.
this other supporter’s conviction must be more recent than mine.
I can see that it’s no one in our world.
there are Dreyfusists among us, are there?
is his name?
Princesse de Guermantes.
That settled it.
He can be very useful to us.
Furthermore, Swann withheld his own name.
She would be so pleased!
I no longer loved Gilberte.
Those scoundrels have more than one card up their sleeves.
Just as everything is going on splendidly, it all collapses.
Her passion for M.
de Charlus did not reveal itself to me at first.
Thus, if I said to her: Actually, M.
de Charlus, and almost without circumlocution.
de Charlus himself did at times.
She had come out without a footman.
She was the first to recover.
Suddenly turning very red, she gave me the letter.
Well, little brother!
said the Duke, stopping M.
Thank you, Basin, M.
I don’t suppose you could find many brothers like them.
I shall invite you with him, the Duchess promised me.
You’ve not quarrelled with him?
… But what can they be talking about?
But this evening, this habitual jealousy was reinforced by another.
For if Mme de Surgis had told M.
And Mme de Guermantes was tormented by this.
Do you remember old Father Courveau: Why is Pascal disturbing?
And why is Pascal disturbed?
She was delighted with you.
de Charlus had observed his brother’s blush.
you said that I had unorthodox tastes.
No I didn’t, protested M.
I had put on my overcoat, for which M.
A fine time to arrive, Paulette!
said the Duchess.
Yes, I am so sorry!
Oriane has really sunk very low, muttered Mme de Gallardon.
I’m sure M.
de Gallardon would never have allowed me.
Mme de Guermantes introduced me.
Mme d’Orvillers was charming, neither too friendly nor piqued.
We were told that the carriage was at the door.
Oriane is really very beautiful still!
said Mme de Gallardon.
 My thoughts, however, were far from Mme de Guermantes.
Whose is that?
This time she pretended to be really angry.
Ah, no, really!
I believe you’re trying to make a fool of me.
But she is the dregs of society.
In fact worse, for my dressmaker is charming.
You must be a little bit cracked, my poor boy.
She’s rather strait-laced, if anything.
Isn’t she, Basin?
You won’t come with us to the ball?
he asked me.
And so I refused.
So long, said the Duke.
Come, Oriane, no speechmaking.
de Guermantes to his wife.
The Duke was momentarily dismayed.
No, no, they’re exaggerating, they’re exaggerating!
Are you sure my helmet has come?
Yes, Monsieur le Duc.
I don’t want to be suffocated, damn it!
Yes, Monsieur le Duc.
Oh, hell and damnation, everything’s going wrong this evening.
I don’t see how they could go with your spurs.
Let’s go and find the dresser, said the Duke.
and Mme de Guermantes as quickly as possible.
Phèdre finished at about half past eleven.
Albertine must have arrived by now.
I went straight to Françoise: Is Mlle Albertine here?
No one has called.
Good God, did that mean that no one would call!
Françoise was upset too, but for quite a different reason.
And I was just saying to myself, Charles attend charlatan.
This was not in the best of taste.
She’s never coming.
Ah, these modern flappers!
I was obliged to go back to my room.
Françoise followed me.
Indeed, her slightest word exasperated me.
I did not move, for fear of not hearing it.
Françoise came in to tidy up the room.
I sprang to the instrument; it was Albertine.
I’m not disturbing you, ringing you up at this hour?
Are you coming round?
I asked in a tone of indifference.
Well … no, unless you absolutely must see me.
I hadn’t read your note properly.
But where was she?
I’m dropping with sleep.
And besides, well, there are endless complications.
You answered that it was all right.
But I see you’re cross with me, I’m sorry.
I wish now I’d never gone to Phèdre.
I shan’t be free for a fortnight or three weeks.
I’ll have a cup of coffee to keep myself awake.
Couldn’t you possibly put it off till tomorrow?
What do you suppose I care about your friend?
Either come or don’t, it’s for you to decide.
Don’t be angry.
it was only out of dissimulation.
I had little cause for astonishment.
However, their sentiments affected me little.
Those of Albertine were a different matter.
And in repeating the sarcastic words: Better late than never!
She makes me laugh, Françoise added, as though mocking Albertine.
Let’s eat my bread.
Ay, that’s the stuff.
Let’s eat thy bread.
I’ve had enough.
I pretended to be writing.
Who were you writing to?
Albertine asked me as she entered the room.
To a pretty little friend of mine, Gilberte Swann.
Don’t you know her?
Can I have a nice kiss, Albertine?
I had never seen her looking so pretty.
You know it’s a great, great pleasure to me.
And a thousand times greater to me, she replied.
Oh, what a pretty book-cover you have there!
Take it, I give it to you as a keepsake.
I asked Albertine if she would like something to drink.
That will be perfect.
I could not accuse her of coldness.
At the very moment I was writing to Gilberte, M.
You can’t sentence a fellow without any evidence against him.
Did you ever see anyone so gaga as Froberville?
Strange times we live in.
The Duke had returned to Paris a fanatical Dreyfusard.
But there is more to it than that.
The craze for Bergotte’s works was unbounded.
So it was with Odette.
Doumer and M.
But Swann’s Dreyfusism was positively useful to Odette.
I beg you to keep quiet.
I forbid it.
She’s very nice.
It was Marie de Marsantes who told me about her.
de Bréauté himself seemed a new man.
Oriane thought her an old cretin.
But Mme de Luxembourg!
Caillaux’s foreign policy was severely trounced.
I consider they’re quite right, he said.
It was eleven o’clock at night.
She is an intelligent woman, he had assured me.
He did not seem overfond of his staff.
If I was not there they would never stir.
I shall post the lift-boy on sentry outside your door.
He has comrades more aged than he is.
It would cause an outcry.
We must act with granulation in everything.
But he is still a trifle young for such positions.
Anyhow, he can leave it all to me.
I know what I’m about.
Oh, that’s nothing!
The loss of time has been quite infinite for infinitesimal.
Meanwhile, we had arrived.
Upheaval of my entire being.
What must she be thinking of me?
How can I have forgotten the address?
Will she know me again, I wonder?
How can I have forgotten her all these months?
Tell me her address.
Is she all right?
Are you quite sure she has everything she needs?
Yes, yes, says my father, you needn’t worry.
Her nurse is well trained.
She sometimes asks what’s become of you.
She was told you were going to write a book.
She seemed pleased.
She wiped away a tear.
What can she have been saying to herself?
And I can’t remember the exact number of the avenue.
I think it would be better if you didn’t go.
She has everything that she wants.
They come and keep the place tidy for her.
But is she often alone?
Yes, but that’s better for her.
Thinking often makes people unhappy.
Besides, you know, she’s quite faded now.
He brought me a message from Albertine.
Yes, replied the manager.
But for my part, I wished to see nobody.
But that sun did not have time to appear.
But now pleasures had no longer any meaning for me.
My mother was to arrive the following day.
Her name was, I think, Mme Poussin.
Finally my mother insisted on my going out.
de Vaugoubert stood watching young embassy secretaries greet M.
for they had none.
I went straight up to my room.
Then sweeter memories returned to me.
She was my grandmother and I was her grandson.
I had accordingly made an appointment with her.
They can’t be very illegitimate’ if they talk like that.
Unless people have been slandering them.
Illegitimate puzzled me more.
But she soon got over it.
And I’ve never had a single one made.
I must go down.
She’s not the sort of person to have here.
She doesn’t like to be kept waiting.
Oh, nowadays, Mademoiselle Albertine, she’s somebody!
I carefully hid myself from her.
Otherwise I should have had her sympathy.
But I gave her mine.
It tortured me.
She ought really to have left that evening.
Then they shut altogether.
Whereupon my grandmother appeared to me, seated in an armchair.
I drew my father aside.
It’s a perfect imitation of life.
But why won’t she give me a kiss?
Look, her poor head is drooping again.
But she wants to go to the Champs-Elysées this afternoon.
It isn’t possible that she no longer loves me.
What can you expect, the dead are the dead.
Balbec is deadly dull this year, she said to me.
There’s not a soul here.
You can imagine what fun it is.
But on reaching the road I found a dazzling spectacle.
I could not remain in the compartment.
It was the only one.
To me he whispered: That’s the Princesse de Parme!
I had no wish to remain there by myself.
It was barely four o’clock.
I had not lighted the lamp.
The daylight had almost gone.
The flag over the Casino flapped in the wind.
At length Françoise arrived, but unaccompanied.
It’ll be a regular scentshop in here.
I thought I should find her here.
I could hear someone mellifluously playing Schumann.
Another name came back to me later, which made thirteen.
They’re all money-grubbers.
But his vocabulary was defective.
or Of course!
I should think so!
or Of course!
as though these words were inevitable.
Anything to oblige.
But there’s nobody on this floor except us two.
Now we’ll be nice and peaceful.
You remember the name: Mlle Albertine Simonet.
Anyhow it’s on the envelope.
You need only say to her that it’s from me.
I should think so!
It’s very inconvenient getting here from Berneville.
Don’t I know it!
You will tell her to come with you.
When will you be back?
Should be able to go all right.
And it was my turn off duty today.
Take my bike with me.
Get there in no time.
She’s down below.
Doesn’t even know where I’ve been.
Even the head doorman didn’t say a word.
She’s not there.
The fact was that I had just heard her laugh.
I should certainly never let mine come here.
Are they pretty, though?
I can’t make out their features.
And theirs, as you see, are touching completely.
Not that Cottard’s conversation was interesting.
Certainly, the Balbec doctor could not stand in Cottard’s way.
But he was in no way eminent.
True, he had caused Cottard some slight annoyance.
The following day, the swelling had gone.
Albertine was making the most passionate protestations of affection.
But one can easily cut a social call.
But I’ve often seen you being impolite.
I’m pretty well in her bad books already.
But if she’s at home every day?
I know she’s at home every day.
It will be less boring that way.
I’m going for their sake.
I shall bring them home in my trap.
Otherwise they won’t have any way of getting back.
She’s very hospitable.
Very well then, you’ll refuse.
I should only make my aunt angry.
It’s cutting it rather fine.
But listen, Albertine, I’ll tell you what we’ll do.
Albertine looked as though she had received a violent blow.
For a moment, she was unable to speak.
If you don’t want me to come with you?
A sudden change of tactics had occurred.
We might dine together.
It would be so nice.
After all, that side of Balbec is much the prettier.
Very well, let her be.
No, it’s wrong to annoy people.
And what about your friends?
Oh, they’ve ditched me often enough.
It’s my turn now.
Well, what’s the matter with that?
Nine will do perfectly.
Besides, one should never worry about how to get back.
We can always find.
Albertine, how you go on!
But the other way, it’s a very different matter.
That way too.
I promise to bring you back safe and sound.
She knew that the loss was not irremediable.
No, Albertine, I don’t want to spoil your pleasure.
The sea air makes me lose my head altogether.
I’m always calling things by the wrong names.
It’s too bad of you.
I’ve never known you to be so cruel.
The sea shall be my tomb.
I shall never see you any more.
There you go, insulting me again.
You know Sappho flung herself into the sea.
Yes, yes, you have no faith in me.
And perhaps she was heartbroken.
I don’t know, said Albertine, is one of them fair?
Is one of them fair?
she asked her friends with a detached air of inquiry.
They weren’t looking at us?
Albertine replied without thinking.
Why, they did nothing else the whole time.
Well then, what about that?
There were, however, moments of respite.
But I found only Andrée there.
Luckily I thought of looking on the beach.
I presented Albertine and her friends.
Mme de Cambremer introduced us all to her daughter-in-law.
And so I offered to take Mme de Cambremer there.
It’s exquisite—reminiscent of … a painted fan.
And how charming the name is, said I.
her daughter-in-law tartly interrupted her.
It’s a most painstaking piece of scholarship.
It does me a world of good.
What a genius!
who had said nothing so far.
I can see that this young lady loves the arts.
You will allow me to put Le Sidaner before him.
Monet, Degas, Manet, yes, there are painters if you like!
Ah, the cathedrals!
You’ll see, it’s just like a public garden at Monte-Carlo.
That’s why I prefer your coast here.
It’s more sombre, more sincere.
But it’s all a question of atmosphere.
He admires them immensely too.
I must look at them again.
I should so much like to hear you play.
so you’ve been in Holland.
Do you know the Vermeers?
snobbishness in changing its object does not change its accent.
But her mistake was not apparent.
But that time was still to come.
Mme de Cambremer-Legrandin remained unaware of it.
What, you like Chopin?
Her salivary hyper-secretion no longer sufficed.
Her musical enthusiasm overpowered her.
He likes Chopin!
It’s so beautiful!
And besides, Cancan doesn’t like to be kept waiting.
One said: Monsieur d’Chenouville.
The Cambremer tradition was different, but no less imperious.
It was the mute e of Chenouville that was suppressed.
Her marriage to M.
It’s a question of principle.
You shall see what a delightful man he is.
And his pictures will enchant you.
Temples of this sort are not without their uses.
You know the scene I mean.
One feels you are so responsive, so artistic.
I heard you talking about literature to my daughter-in-law.
We’re not on the best of terms.
She feels that I neglect her.
Good heavens, I’m easy enough to get on with.
If anybody needs me, I’m always there to say: Present!
But they tried to get their hooks into me.
It’s a threat to the liberty of my holidays.
I was obliged to say: Stop there!
You seem to be in her good books.
Well, I’m going to take a turn before dinner.
Go home, she replied in a tone of authority.
Shan’t we see you again this evening?
I don’t know, it will depend on this person.
But the liftboy’s anxious gloom continued to grow.
Perhaps he had been missed.
And yet the latter’s artlessness helped perhaps to simplify things.
I drew Albertine’s attention to them.
Don’t change the subject, she said, be frank with me.
It at least goes straight to the point!
said Albertine reproachfully.
But I swear to you that I won’t be angry.
But tell me, what on earth have I done?
Albertine asked me.
But won’t your aunt be angry?
Not at all!
She’ll understand perfectly well.
If it had been true, I would have told you.
But Andrée and I both loathe that sort of thing.
There could be no comparison of their respective credibility.
At first I kept them tight shut.
What an old spoilsport you are!
she said to me.
We talked of the old days at Combray.
These days were not very frequent, however.
There were still few people at Balbec, few girls.
No longer was there any room for hesitation or fear.
You wouldn’t care to go along the cliff?
No longer any obstacles for me, at least.
Often I wrote to them before meeting them.
Did she write: Your precious letter?
But the rest is so tender.
Oh, that more such flowers may come tomorrow!
I never wished for myrrh.
Then they grew bolder.
I must explain why.
Nissim Bernard practised the family virtues in the highest degree.
But he never lunched at home.
Every day at noon he was at the Grand Hotel.
A budding virtue mid such perils goes!
That seeks Thee and would fain be innocent.
In riches and in gold put not thy trust.
However that might be, and albeit M.
He felt those childish arms about him thrown.
And by the second day, M.
The dire assault his innocence destroyed.
From that moment the boy’s life was altered.
Let our desires now range.
Let us then hasten to enjoy this life!
Of blind and meek obedience.
Who would want to raise his voice?
Since that day, M.
It was M.
But this very coldness pleased M.
A post in the cellars had been offered him.
Now this pleasure was so keen that every year M.
And so M.
In the meantime M.
No sooner had M.
Our mysteries veil from the eyes of wicked men!
little black devil with raven hair, oh deep-dyed mischief!
There he goes, now, look, he’s spilling his milk.
Are you mad, talking to Monsieur like that?
A proper snake, I tell you.
Oh, the soft talk, the deceitfulness!
Ah, rogue among rogues, churl of churls!
So you go rummaging in his drawers now, do you?
growled the torrent Marie.
Nissim Bernard’s behaviour … Ah!
What a serious air!
He’s just like a child.
Ah, what youth!
Ah, what lovely skin!
You’ll never grow old.
Look at him now, he’s angry.
He shoots up, straight as a gospel truth.
And the sisters returned.
Look, Marie, at his delicate features.
They never read anything, not even a newspaper.
Mightn’t it just be riddles?
To the manager, this would have conveyed nothing.
Nothing could then have revitalised her.
She smiled in the sun and became bluer still.
At such moments she was truly celestial.
But gradually they returned to their old ways.
And indeed her glance did not say: Will you?
They might have spent a bit more on it!
Have they told you?
Not far away from us was M.
Nissim Bernard, who had a black eye.
He at once received a thorough hiding.
But I heard you order tomatoes.
They are bad today.
We were even less eager to speak to him.
Albertine’s friends had gone away for some time.
I was anxious to provide her with distractions.
Mme Verdurin did not give dinners, but she had Wednesdays.
These Wednesdays were works of art.
But I have a big surprise for you next week.
It gave her an opportunity to spur on the faithful.
Today was the last for this year.
Her face and her manner proclaimed the fact aloud.
The train stopped at Epreville, and she remained seated.
I thought of him now with horror.
From them, which is to say from myself.
He left us at the station.
Yes, she’s still rather childish.
But you don’t know anything against her?
I added anxiously.
When I turned my head towards M.
He is in the regimental band, said M.
They made me forget to convey M.
de Charlus’s message.
What, are you at Doncières?
Suddenly I saw M.
de Charlus bearing down on us.
My dilatoriness had evidently taxed his patience.
Knowing as I did the insolence of M.
He did not however give me time for reflexion.
What makes you say that?
And remembering the manner in which M.
The desired object had merely changed sex.
Besides, the haughtiness with which M.
This generosity at once attracted a flower-seller.
Good God, why can’t she leave us alone, said M.
Perhaps, the porter not yet being out of earshot, M.
How he would simplify my life, M.
de Charlus said to himself.
The train for Paris started, without M.
de Charlus and Morel.
It was simply that I had learned to know him.
We must never quarrel again.
It isn’t nice.
And dream your dreams upon my shoulder?
that was a good one!
he said when he had recovered himself.
A minute later!
she’s intelligent, that one, she’s a charming woman.
What name did you say?
Odette had asked with sudden wistfulness.
Odette would reply, accentuating her smile, that doesn’t surprise me.
But the story would fall flat.
It isn’t the local train today, it’s the departmental train.
Nobody knows this line better than I do.
But isn’t the Princess on the train?
When I saw the train I was flabbergasted.
That’s what you call arriving at the psychological moment.
I must say we really are having quite a jaunt.
inquired the doctor with a note of pride.
le Prince de Talleyrand.
le Duc de La Rochefoucauld, M.
He is an ancestor.
Whether or not M.
Tell her that I shall be coming later on.
You must, of course, have heard of the Verdurins.
They know everybody.
They’ve got the goods, all right.
It’s generally estimated that Mme Verdurin is worth thirty-five million.
Well, thirty-five million, that’s quite a figure.
And so she doesn’t go in for half-measures.
You mentioned the Duchesse de Guermantes.
I’ll tell you the difference.
You see the distinction, of course?
He meant that it was the very height of fashion.
But what of that!
The Princess will be at Maineville, Cottard went on.
She will be coming with us.
But I shan’t introduce you to her at once.
It will be better to leave that to Mme Verdurin.
Unless I find a loophole.
What were you saying?
The Princess will be at Maineville, Cottard went on.
She will be coming with us.
But I shan’t introduce you to her at once.
It will be better to leave that to Mme Verdurin.
Unless I find a loophole.
What were you saying?
He began by promising to be an excellent journalist.
Such scandals happen in life.
I answered: No, fresh air doesn’t bother me, Mademoiselle.
and she lit a cigarette.
At the third station she sprang from the train.
Next day, I inquired of Albertine who she could be.
I should so like to see her again, I exclaimed.
Don’t worry, one always sees people again, replied Albertine.
But I never forgot her.
And as for loving, one would love more than ever.
Too bad if carnal desire increases instead of languishing!
Still no news, I suppose, of the violinist, said Cottard.
It was assumed that he had missed it.
This evening, the Marquis and Marquise de Cambremer!
But I knew absolutely nothing about it.
The Princess Sherbatoff, the Marquis and Marquise de Cambremer.
It’s going to be an exceptionally brilliant roomful.
It’s time we got there to lend her a hand.
Besides, they’re bound to be absolutely anti, and jingoistic, M.
Verdurin had said.
For Dreyfusism was triumphant politically but not socially.
There’s no need to be eternally discussing the Dreyfus case.
That will be well worth a boring evening.
We must assemble in full force to stand the boredom.
we are to see the young Marquise de Cambremer?
She is intelligent, Ski informed me.
And besides, her colouring is charming.
I’ve already been introduced to Mme de Cambremer, I replied.
In that case, you will find yourself on familiar ground.
I’m interested in that priest, and also in etymologies.
Let me give you an example.
It is what the English call ford Oxford, Hereford.
We say dévaster, but also gâcher.
Isn’t Néhomme, I asked, somewhere near Carquethuit and Clitourps?
You will remember Querqueville, Carquebut, not to mention Dunkerque.
And that you will find over the whole of France.
Your abbé was hypnotised by Duneville.
Douville, in Latin donvilla, says he.
But the fact is, the abbé is mistaken.
Douville was formerly called Escalecliff, the steps up the cliff.
Now there were, quite close to Douville, certain famous springs.
He was probably better on his own ground.
Ah, his neurasthenia is to blame.
Absolutely: rheumatism and neurasthenia are vicarious forms of neuro-arthritism.
You may pass from one to the other by metastasis.
Purgon himself, of Molièresque memory!
and Renneville too.
They can’t have run through without stopping.
Come along and find her.
Let’s hope this won’t land us in the soup?
Princess, we must have missed you at Maineville!
May we come and sit in your compartment?
They never remember anything.
Don’t you ever marry, my boy, he said to me.
You really are one of the faithful!
Devil take it!
How do we know that?
It is called Fervaches.
Why, Princess, Fervaches means hot springs.
But he wasn’t as young as all that, said Brichot.
Brichot agreed that he was mistaken.
The train stopped.
We were at La Sogne.
The name stirred my curiosity.
Brichot, he may know, perhaps.
The Doctor, Saniette and Ski got into the other.
We began by driving through Douville.
Has anyone told her?
cried Brichot, ah!
There was a man who was one of us.
Beneath a cold exterior, Mme Verdurin conceals treasures of sensibility.
She wanted to go to Paris, did she?
I should have liked to kiss the Princess.
And she confessed that the country was indeed picturesque.
Yes, said the Princess, M.
Her nerves are velly bad just now.
I’m glad you warned me, Brichot artlessly replied.
I shall pass on your advice to Cottard.
The carriage stopped for a moment.
Verdurin stood waiting for us on the steps.
We’re all friends here.
I told him how greatly I admired the scenery.
Why not come and spend a week or two here?
The air is excellent.
Brichot was afraid that his handclasp had not been understood.
It’s dreadful, replied M.
So young, Brichot pursued the point.
Annoyed at being detained over these futilities, M.
We have a bouillabaisse which mustn’t be kept waiting.
Verdurin in a tone of profound irony.
It’s deplorable, three weeks after her bronchitis.
When that happens, it’s I who have to nurse her.
Think of him, but don’t speak about him.
Here’s Cottard, now, you can ask him.
They would try it again with others, that was understood.
But the opportunity did not present itself every day.
Verdurin is right, what is the use of lamentations?
Verdurin’s remarks the most courageous stoicism.
What, are you still talking about Dechambre?
Listen, he said to Brichot, don’t let’s exaggerate.
My wife was infatuated with him and made his reputation.
You know what she’s like.
The beggar hasn’t arrived yet.
The faithful entered the drawing-room.
Did you have a pleasant journey?
This compliment did not strike me as being very apt.
He seems charming, I remarked.
Verdurin in an exaggerated tone, as though reciting a lesson.
And I wondered whether M.
de Charlus in their house.
Whereas in the Faubourg Saint-Germain, where M.
Similarly, if in the world of painters and actors M.
In short, all the stories related of our M.
de Charlus referred to the other.
Many professionals swore that they had had relations with M.
de Charlus belonged, his title or his name.
He reminded one of an ebony paper-knife.
But my very enthusiasm made me exacting.
Do you want a new lot?
I hear the carriage coming back, the Mistress suddenly murmured.
Why, yes, here they are!
As for M.
Besides, can one entirely separate M.
Although other reasons may have dictated this transformation of M.
Morel, who accompanied him, came up to greet me.
a bad impression on me.
And this is why.
In which he resembled the majority of mankind.
Moreover a manager M.
Where’s the Baron?
le Professeur Cottard.
de Cambremer bore little resemblance to the old Marquise.
No doubt one grew accustomed to it.
It is possible that M.
By a transposition of the senses, M.
de Cambremer looked at you with his nose.
Although the propriety of the dark clothes which M.
At best one might have said of M.
You know we’re going to dine with our tenants.
That will be well worth an increased rent.
de Charlus, whom she knew by sight.
For as M.
The unfortunate thing was that he knew only two.
And so they kept cropping up.
No, said M.
de Cambremer was a marquis, M.
de Charlus is, after all, his inferior.
Very well, I shall put him beside the Princess.
And Mme Verdurin introduced Mme Sherbatoff to M.
Verdurin introduced me to M.
It’s not right.
Mme Verdurin was annoyed that M.
de Cambremer should claim to recognise La Raspelière so well.
After this acerbic riposte to M.
Cottard, who was seated next to M.
But in his case it is much stronger.
The way he looks at one!
… A fine way to behave!
The invert’s rage is even more obsessive.
de Charlus’s error was brief.
Do you shoot much, Monsieur?
said Mme Verdurin contemptuously to M.
Cottard inquired of the Mistress.
I shoot mostly in the forest of Chantepie, replied M.
No, I’ve told her nothing, said Ski.
Does it deserve its name?
Brichot asked M.
I mean: do many magpies sing in it?
It was all Ski’s fault.
You’re pretty eccentric with your information, my dear fellow!
And there was Brichot waiting for us at the station!
Will you hold your tongue!
What if my wife were to hear you?
said the Doctor.
This wife of mine, it is jealous.
You see, said M.
de Cambremer, what it is to meet a scholar.
Do you suppose fish drink more than other creatures?
You say: mind your p’s and q’s.
Why p’s and q’s in particular?
Why easy as pie’?
Why at sixes and sevens’?
Why sow one’s wild oats’?
But at this, the defence of M.
I wonder what that chandelier is that’s hanging all askew.
de Charlus and Morel, hoping that M.
You’re sure that Chantepie means the singing magpie, Chochotte?
Complete my education.
She had heard that Morel had come with M.
Brichot interests me too.
Take that, Chochotte, said Mme de Verdurin.
And otherwise, did you have a pleasant journey?
But I must answer M.
I say, that looks a fine beast, said M.
de Cambremer to Mme Verdurin, pointing to a fish.
It was they who thanked me for coming.
He has written a book.
de Cambremer laugh long and loud.
You haven’t seen any, and you saw straight, replied Brichot.
He has indeed!
exclaimed Mme de Cambremer.
But there are other sources.
He found that the place in question was named Pont-à-Quileuvre.
You were speaking of frogs.
Meanwhile Cottard, blocked on one side by M.
de Cambremer heard the question and smiled.
What a small world!
They asked me no questions.
But you yourself, what do you think of her?
I asked my mother.
Well, I’m not the one who’s going to marry her.
She is not this: she has not the Rennes accent.
In time, I shall perhaps say: she is that.
In any case, she was not dining with them.
That is perhaps why it’s not yet official.
Anyhow there’s a lot of talk about it.
You needn’t expect any light music here.
What interests me most about M.
I’m not interested in what’s learnt.
One of our eminent Senators is called M.
and Mme Verdurin’s wit.
Moreover, Mme Verdurin had actually smiled at him once.
Decidedly, they were kind people.
He was not going to be tortured any more.
Is not this precisely the moment?
In fact, I’ve had some disgusting dinners there.
Well, it’s not positively bad, replied Mme Verdurin, mollified.
And if you come next Wednesday, it will be better.
de la Boulaye, the birch bouleau, M.
d’Aunay, the alder aune, M.
de Bussière, the box-tree buis, M.
On hearing the name Saniette on Brichot’s lips, M.
And turning to Cottard, Is Madame Putbus here?
I asked him.
But that’s quite close to here.
I hope you’ll come over often with Charlie Morel.
To this invitation M.
de Charlus responded with a silent nod.
And that general is a Monsieur de something.
I didn’t know that.
He’s one of the happy band, is he?
But I’m not at all surprised.
But they know quite well who I am.
What’s that he says?
It’s impossible to understand what you say.
What have you got in your mouth?
Che, che, do try to speak distinctly, said M.
Verdurin, I can’t understand a word you say.
Come, now, it’s not his fault, said Mme Verdurin.
I was at the Chercheuse d’Esprit by Favart.
It’s the Chercheuse d’Esprit that you call the Chercheuse?
de Montesquiou-Fezensac instead of M.
Mme Verdurin could not contain herself: Oh yes it is!
she exclaimed with a snigger.
Brichot was more loquacious.
It’s true, he replied to M.
This name made a great impression upon Mme Verdurin.
so you go to Mme de Molé’s!
as though it was doubly extraordinary, both that M.
Now society, or at least the people to whom M.
de Charlus and the Comtesse Molé.
Who was in this Chercheuse d’Esprit, my good Saniette?
What in the world is that?
Verdurin shouted, as though the house were on fire.
Ah, the pedant, that’s you.
No, really the man’s cracked, exclaimed M.
You’re like M.
Nobody had any idea what he meant.
Balbec is probably a corruption of Dalbec, he told me.
These heights had been replaced by nicknames.
I’ve seen several sketches of it in his studio.
You know Tiche?
cried Mme Verdurin.
Thank heaven, I never see him now.
Would you say that my husband had purple hair, Monsieur?
There are bits of everybody in it.
There’s not the slightest connexion with Helleu, said Mme Verdurin.
Yes, yes, it’s hotted-up eighteenth century.
He’s a steam Watteau, and he began to laugh.
Old, old as the hills.
Ah, if only he’d stayed with us!
At bottom, he was a mediocrity.
I may tell you that I felt it at once.
Really, he never interested me.
I was quite fond of him, that was all.
For one thing, he was so dirty!
Tell me now, do you like people who never wash?
What is this prettily coloured thing that we’re eating?
It’s called strawberry mousse, said Mme Verdurin.
But it’s ex-qui-site.
You ought to open bottles of Château-Margaux, Château-Lafite, port wine.
But not to drink, Ski went on.
It would cost almost as much, M.
He’s the good pupil, the exam fiend.
Ski, now, only follows his own fancy.
Will you mind what you’re saying, please.
He really is magnificent, the Professor, she said.
Why not declare outright that I keep a disorderly house.
Anyone would think you didn’t know what Madame Elstir was.
I’d sooner have the lowest streetwalker at my table!
Oh no, I’m not stooping to that!
It’s extraordinary in a man of his intelligence, said Cottard.
But people say that he finds her very intelligent.
There’s no use denying it, our Tiche was extremely stupid.
Certainly, people’s follies are insupportable.
And she took M.
de Cambremer’s arm again.
Verdurin wanted to apologise for this to M.
Verdurin went on.
Nor is it always sufficient.
Brichot isn’t one of us.
What were you going to say to me?
Only that we put you on the left, replied M.
But, explained M.
Verdurin, hurt, we did it on purpose.
But you see, since we happened to have M.
Pardon me, M.
However, it’s not of the slightest importance.
Don’t you call that striking?
And what marvellous texture!
One longs to finger it.
she exclaimed with a burst of pride.
Close beside us, M.
de Cambremer, who was already seated, seeing that M.
And so he exclaimed: Good gracious me!
There’s really no need!
I see you like draughts, they said to me.
exclaimed the Marquise.
You didn’t find the arrangement too bad?
They have some fine things.
Besides, are they really as fine as all that?
You noticed, said M.
Such bad form!
But what do you expect?
They must be retired tradespeople.
It’s really not bad for them.
It’s sheer butchery.
Those paths running all lopsided.
Mme de Cambremer combined both rules.
de Cambremer, giving way to a discreet show of mirth.
I’m not making a personal issue of it, you understand.
I’m speaking of it as though it were someone else.
More delicate, perhaps, than sincere, said M.
there I must differ from you.
Fools will tell you that he is a stage emperor.
But he was not mistaken in trusting to our discretion.
Observing that Morel was listening, M.
de Charlus proceeded to develop the reasons for his claim.
I found M.
I’m sure you are talking about Brichot, said Ski.
Eh, Chantepie, and Freycinet, he didn’t spare you anything.
I was watching you, little Mistress.
Oh yes, I saw you, I nearly burst.
You’re talking about Chantepie, I’m sure, said M.
Verdurin as he came towards us.
With Brichot, however, there was another reason.
I was not one of the little clan.
Human stupidity has never sunk to greater depths.
Like the shocking draught-curtains, it had escaped my notice.
Take care, Mme Verdurin murmured, pointing to Brichot.
Undoubtedly the discovery pained him.
Not kind to him!
It’s so unmanly.
I can’t bear it.
de Charlus was explaining to M.
And, to be sure, it was always acknowledged there.
Maecenas atavis edite regibus!
said Brichot, addressing M.
de Charlus, who acknowledged the compliment with a slight nod.
What did you say?
I am sure that M.
de Charlus knows all about Maecenas.
Mme Verdurin could not altogether suppress a smile of self-satisfaction.
She went over to Morel.
He’s nice, your father’s friend, she said to him.
He will get on well in our little nucleus.
Where does he live in Paris?
Mme Verdurin demanded a little violin music first.
To the general astonishment, M.
This might have been said by the Duc de Guermantes.
de Charlus was only a Guermantes when all was said.
And it may have been true.
from the first note.
play this, look, this piece, it’s divine, she cried.
It interests me, don’t you know!
I speak quite seriously, Madame, said Brichot.
I never said a word to you about M.
Do you intend to remain long on this coast?
Mme Verdurin asked M.
Goodness me, one never knows, replied M.
de Charlus in a nasal drawl.
I should like to stay until the end of September.
You take an interest in all that sort of thing?
You are perhaps afflicted with intermittent deafness, M.
de Charlus replied insolently.
At that moment, when the Offertory begins, went on M.
What an edification for the faithful!
Cottard and Morel were seated face to face.
Your deal, said Cottard.
Suppose we go nearer to the card-table, M.
She was wedded to the part.
I used to enjoy too listening to Ingalli-Marié.
What does he do for a living?
What does he sell?
The pride that M.
Adopting a reverse procedure, knowing that M.
Verdurin assumed an artless air.
This name, murmured in a modest tone, surprised M.
You don’t mean Professor Cottard?
You’re sure you’re not mistaken!
You’re certain it’s the same man!
The one who lives in the Rue du Bac!
Yes, his address is 43, Rue du Bac.
You know him?
But everybody knows Professor Cottard.
He’s a leading light.
That’s why I took the liberty of asking you.
Well then, what shall I play, trumps?
By this time, Mme Cottard was sound asleep.
Now then, Léontine, you’re snoring, the Professor called to her.
They imagine it, perhaps, said M.
de Cambremer with a laugh.
It’s only fools who say that, replied the Professor.
You mention trional, have you any idea what it is?
No, replied M.
de Cambremer, abashed.
Which are ten times as toxic, the Professor interrupted.
As for trional, M.
She probably knows as much about it as you do.
Come along, Léontine, wake up, you’ll get stiff.
Did you ever see me fall asleep after dinner?
You’ll get fat, you’re arresting your circulation.
She doesn’t even hear what I’m saying.
de Cambremer, seeking to rehabilitate himself with Cottard.
After a heavy meal one ought to take exercise.
Stuff and nonsense!
replied the Doctor.
Then it’s sleep that interrupts the digestion.
Now then, Léontine, quick march, it’s time we were going.
Oh, good gracious, what a fool I am!
Whatever have I been saying?
In another minute I would have dozed off.
It’s that wretched fire.
Everybody laughed, for there was no fire in the room.
You look just like an old peasant.
He could ask me for anything in the world!
Play a trump, M.
de Charlus said to Morel with a delighted air.
A trump, here goes, said the violinist.
You ought to have declared your king first, said M.
I have the king, said Morel.
He’s a fine man, replied the Professor.
What’s that thing up there with the sticks?
asked Mme Verdurin, drawing M.
Are they your arms?
she added with sarcastic scorn.
No, they’re not ours, replied M.
For they were supposed to render a stronghold impregnable.
Of course, with our modern artillery, they make one smile.
You’re up against it, Doctor, said M.
This young man is astonishing, M.
de Charlus interrupted naïvely, pointing to Morel.
He plays like a god.
He who laughs last laughs longest.
Queen, ace, Morel announced triumphantly, for fortune was favouring him.
We’re so pleased to have met M.
de Charlus, said Mme de Cambremer to Mme Verdurin.
Had you never met him before?
That’s nothing, said Mme Verdurin.
That’s something you haven’t got at Féterne!
Are you staying much longer in the neighbourhood, Madame?
Say what you like, they need fresh air.
Their little faces are already completely changed.
Whatever happens we shall stay another month at least.
in that case we shall meet again.
You’re going to have a splendid night for your journey.
We could drive you over tomorrow morning.
It’s certain to be fine.
The roads are excellent.
I said that it was impossible.
Leave them alone, they have heaps of time.
They’re far better off here.
de Charlus directly, won’t you stay the night?
We have some nice rooms overlooking the sea.
No, he can’t, M.
He has a pass until midnight only.
From the sermon that Brichot had addressed to me, M.
de Cambremer had concluded that I was a Dreyfusard.
And my cousin’s opinions were the exact opposite, said M.
Well, you know, I call that really fine!
de Cambremer’s conclusion.
What, you’ve gained half a stone in two months?
I say, that’s really fine!
Refreshments were set out on a table.
But on hearing M.
When one can play the violin like that!
Why, yes … why, yes, replied M.
This was the first skirmish between them.
Mme Verdurin barely noticed it.
There were to be others, alas, in Paris.
de Charlus remained glued to his chair.
de Charlus’s relations with Comtesse Molé.
You told me that you knew Mme de Molé.
Does that mean you go there?
that I don’t remember.
said Mme Verdurin, you don’t know the Duc de Guermantes?
And how could I not know him?
de Charlus, his lips curving in a smile.
Why do you say: How could I not know him?
 Because he is my brother, said M.
She bore down upon me.
I heard M.
de Cambremer invite you to dinner just now.
It has nothing to do with me, you understand.
For one thing, the place is infested with bores.
But isn’t the place itself very pretty?
Mmmmyesss … If you like.
You shall see.
It’s a magnificent drive, and the cider is delicious.
Come with us.
You, Brichot, you shall come too.
And you too, Ski.
I don’t know whom all he has invited.
Monsieur de Charlus, are you one of them?
Does she like conversation, and intelligent people?
Is she agreeable?
Yes, very well then.
Bring her with you.
The Cambremers aren’t the only people in the world.
de Charlus, and I forget who else.
Perhaps you’re thinking of the reputation of the local pancakes.
My cook makes them far better.
She was only seventeen.
You can bring whom you please.
I wouldn’t say that to everybody.
You don’t know little Mme de Longpont?
I don’t want to have any boring women.
It won’t always be like tonight, you know!
I heard you say that you thought Swann clever.
He was so dull!
And as I expressed a contrary opinion: It’s the truth.
That, after all, is the test.
And yet the little he had he picked up here.
I assured her that he was highly intelligent.
Really, one got to the end of him very soon.
I was always bored to death by him.
And I can put up with anything except being bored.
That I cannot stand!
However: you’re coming again with your cousin.
Féterne is starvation corner.
Why, you’ll die of hunger.
When I go there, I shall dine before I start.
Do you like apple-tarts?
So come and stay.
There’s far more room here than you’d think.
You might bring your cousin to stay.
She would get a change of air from Balbec.
My word, I’ve cured some, and not only this time.
That’s always been my luck.
Anyhow, give your cousin my message.
But having heard that Saint-Loup knew M.
He’s not taking up medicine, by any chance, or literature?
Doncières isn’t much fun.
Has Saniette been irritating you again?
Isn’t it superb?
Poor man, he’s very ill.
He’s really too stupid.
Have you any trumps?
From what I saw, ’pon my soul … said M.
Here comes the lady of diamonds, said the Doctor.
Zat iss trump, you know?
de Cambremer, there’s only the University of Paris.
Have you any little dears?
he said, turning to Morel.
Then I play this old David.
Then you have five, you’ve won!
A splendid victory, Doctor, said the Marquis.
It’s my deal.
and Mme Verdurin accompanied us to the door.
It looks as though the weather has changed.
A vain search was made for the Norwegian philosopher.
Had he been seized by a colic?
Had he been afraid of missing the train?
Had an aeroplane come to fetch him?
Had he been carried aloft in an Assumption?
You are unwise, M.
de Cambremer said to me, it’s as cold as charity.
the Doctor inquired.
Beware of your spasms, the Marquis went on.
My sister never goes out at night.
However, she is in a pretty bad state at present.
They are not a frigore spasms, said Cottard sententiously.
Ah, well, M.
I’m here on holiday.
All the same, we’re on quite good terms.
Good-bye, my dear Saniette.
I do so enjoy seeing him.
 I never said anything of the sort, said M.
On arriving at the station of Douville-Féterne, M.
Twenty sous is right, as it’s only a short drive.
He and Mme de Cambremer left us at La Sogne.
I’m sure she’ll be interested.
I understood that he meant: will be pleased.
de Cambremer would start watching her victim with a laugh.
you rascal, you’re a lucky man and no mistake!
Or obliging: I’m here, you know.
I was dropping with sleep.
You know, sir, she’s a fine lady, my sister is.
She plays the piano, she talks Spanish.
She’s full of fun.
It’s not the same style of thing, of course.
But it’s a superb position.
I’m the only one still on the shelf.
But you never know.
Good night, sir.
thank you, sir.
You’ll pardon the expression.
Good night, sir.
Perhaps indeed more than another time: another life.
It seems a positive waste.
At the eleventh ring he came.
It was only the first after all.
My numbed hands had never even moved.
Boutroux, my eminent colleague—pardon me, confrère, what M.
Bergson had said to M.
One of my colleagues lectures on ancient history.
I cannot say whether this conversation between M.
Bergson and M.
Boutroux is accurately reported.
Personally, my own experience has produced the opposite results.
But not the faculty of recalling them.
What, then, is a memory which we do not recall?
Or, indeed, let us go further.
A common oblivion obliterates everything.
The valet came in.
We can count these meteorites.
But, in this instance, sleep had fashioned sounds.
More material and simpler, they lasted longer.
I felt none the less rested.
I felt entirely relaxed for another reason.
Now I had been dreaming that M.
de Charlus, could not even guess whom the Baron meant.
I only speak to them on duty.
asked the Baron.
The Prince de Guermantes.
I adore the Beautiful.
The waiters raised their eyebrows.
Aimé cast a suspicious glance.
When I passed M.
He was chatting at that moment to two waiters.
I was all the more astonished because M.
de Charlus had come to spy on us.
Hence Aimé reproached them with not being serious.
He had every right to do so.
He himself was certainly serious.
For business must come first.
I was wrong.
But imagination outreaches reality.
And the pageboy’s embarrassment had probably aroused in M.
de Charlus had been deeply attached.
You have decided otherwise.
It will soon be forgotten.
de Charlus had anticipated.
But in the interval M.
de Charlus had made Morel’s acquaintance.
At most, his relations with Morel being possibly platonic, M.
It was, because of the anti-social nature of M.
de Charlus and Aimé.
Every day I went out with Albertine.
To begin with, that is to say.
I took her upstairs to my room for a moment.
She jumped for joy.
Are we going to pay a call on the Verdurins?
Here, you’ll look better in these.
They’re for me?
I’m ordered for Mlle Simonet.
I can’t take this gentleman.
There was a grain of truth in this assertion.
Just as you took a book from M.
Verdurin to invite him to dine on the following Wednesday.
From the astonishment which M.
From that moment my visit was ruined.
I pretended not to have understood.
A moment later it became evident that M.
Verdurin was to be of the party.
But it will be too far for M.
Verdurin, I objected.
Look at him, he’s quite delighted.
But we have a call to make, I said.
It is not the only factor either.
In themselves, M.
It was in a restaurant of elongated shape at Saint-Mars-le-Vêtu.
Can’t you get them to remove this thing?
Yes … said Morel, embarrassed.
Don’t you like roses?
Do you like names?
Have you found pretty titles for your little concert numbers?
There is one that’s called Poème triste.
That’s hideous, replied M.
What’s that you say?
But how do you know all that?
de Charlus, amazed at Morel’s intuition.
I can spot them in an instant.
And with gigolos I’m surer still.
I could save you from making mistakes.
They’ll be having the fair at Balbec soon.
We’ll find lots of things there.
So that M.
de Charlus supposed that he was still referring to girls.
Would you really do that?
Wouldn’t I half!
It’s dangerous, said M.
And what about me?
le Duc’s house.
Jupien is a good man, and the child is charming.
It would be terrible to cause them distress.
That was damned silly of him, exclaimed Morel.
On the contrary, M.
de Charlus retorted warmly, in a shrill voice.
It was a proof of his intelligence.
de Charlus had fled, handing over to the real M.
de Charlus, full of artistic refinement, sensibility and kindness.
de Charlus to have meant Mendelssohn was to imitate unceasingly.
A good Christian, I don’t understand.
Can’t you see we’ve reached the dessert.
It’s a pear.
No, I didn’t know.
I can see that you know nothing.
Waiter, have you any Doyenné des Comices?
No, sir, I haven’t.
Have you any Triomphe de Jodoigne?
Very well, since you’ve nothing, we may as well go.
The Duchesse d’Angoulême is not in season yet.
Come along, Charlie.
Unfortunately for M.
And when M.
Then she collected her things.
We passed Marcouville-l’Orgueilleuse.
Albertine could tell a restoration at a glance.
No, definitely not, said Albertine, I don’t like it.
But I like its name orgueilleuse.
We shall be going there the next time, shan’t we?
Her veil floated behind her.
We sat pressed close together.
Night began to fall.
For a moment he was close by us.
She was gazing at him with rounded eyes.
Finally I would take Albertine back to Parville.
I would re-read them as I got into bed.
People never cease to change place in relation to ourselves.
You belong, my uncle Charlus belongs.
But Saniette went to the other extreme.
Such a suggestion would not have alarmed me.
He was like a bird irresistibly drawn towards a snake.
Finally he could restrain himself no longer.
I haven’t half got a cold!
They say Paris is very superb, he went on.
There’s no danger now, I’ve fixed the button.
But who is the person who called to see me?
It’s the gentleman you went out with yesterday.
I’ll go and fetch his card, it’s with my porter.
A lesson in the use of words only.
It was only half so.
The carriages were unsatisfactory.
What a rattle-trap, Albertine would say.
It was time to do something drastic.
Morel persuaded M.
It was agreed that while M.
I think someone else would be more suitable, I replied.
He will be wanted here for dinner.
A look of anger flitted across Morel’s face.
I realised later on his reason for this choice.
So is his brother, for that matter.
Did you say drinking?
You’ve never noticed it?
Does he drive anyone else, then?
Who said that?
Fontanes, to Chateaubriand.
He also knew certain love letters of Napoleon.
Good, I thought to myself, he’s well-read.
In several of these the lamp was already lit.
so you’re off to La Raspelière!
Wherein busy men show a lack of forethought.
de Charlus had now figured for some months.
What’s that you’re saying?
asked Mme Cottard.
de Charlus must be a garrulous Jew.
de Charlus’s compartment, led by Cottard who was still perplexed.
de Charlus imaginary sufferings.
It is a great pleasure to us.
I am greatly honoured, the Baron intoned, bowing coldly.
I meanwhile was examining the Baron’s volume of Balzac.
He’s a fanatic, thought Mme Cottard.
Out of all these M.
And so Mme Cottars’s mistake amused me greatly.
Besides, you wouldn’t understand, you know nothing about medicine.
But when all was said, if M.
And until we came to Doncières M.
Certainly when M.
Yet how astonished M.
On such days M.
de Charlus moved in the same world.
One of the two—what good is that to me?
Mme Verdurin had retorted crossly.
Madame, that sort of thing is very difficult to know.
Mme Verdurin had been impelled by no malice.
de Charlus on the same evening without their clashing.
To make the most of M.
You must know far better than I do, M.
You don’t want to come out with us?
It’s by Roujon.
The title is attractive: Among Men.
I resumed my seat by the side of the Princess.
She doesn’t care for polite speeches.
Besides, I ought not to judge Princess Sherbatoff severely.
Her case is so common!
He is the Duke’s brother.
For nobody was ever base enough to repeat to M.
You forget that I’m a woman!
And yet she was genuinely, deeply attached to M.
What a shock it would have been for M.
you’ve never read Les Illusions perdues?
And the death of Lucien!
Chateaubriand aux potatoes?
put in Dr Cottard.
The sage is of necessity sceptical, replied the Doctor.
What do I know?
Gn thi seauton, said Socrates.
He was quite right, excess in anything is a mistake.
What does his philosophy amount to?
Very little when all is said.
After all, Socrates was nothing out of the common.
Like Jesus Christ: Love one another!
it’s all very pretty.
My dear, Mme Cottard implored.
Naturally my wife protests, women are all neurotic.
But, my dear Doctor, I’m not neurotic, murmured Mme Cottard.
What, she’s not neurotic!
Old Bouchard, when he heard of it, congratulated me.
I never had the honour of knowing Monsieur Taine, M.
Nevertheless, in spite of these ridiculous social affectations, M.
At the word borrowed from the Greek with which M.
In his presence, M.
Ski having shown some determination to pursue the subject, M.
One sensed from these words that M.
Why, what have you been talking about?
said Albertine, astonished at the solemn, paternal tone which M.
de Charlus had suddenly adopted.
And she wondered whether this would find favour with M.
I offer you my sincerest compliments.
de Charlus about the Princesse de Cadignan.
It belongs to one of my cousins.
Anyhow you must have seen her at Mme de Villeparisis’s.
asked Brichot, captivated.
Yes, do you know her?
de Charlus dryly.
I have had occasion to write to him there.
I told Morel, thinking to interest him, that M.
de Norpois was a friend of my father.
Mme Boissier, however, was not invited.
He did indeed know him, for it was his father.
The carriage entrance was always kept shut.
But it was in no way out of the ordinary.
Charles Morel had grown up in this belief.
He had not outgrown it.
What you want is something in the style of 40bis!
Your uncle knew what he was about.
The melancholy air which M.
he exclaimed, what a masterpiece!
How far-reaching it is!
But the Baron was an artist to his fingertips.
When, after their first meeting, M.
And so M.
To be sure, after Charlie Morel had left us, M.
I have seen M.
de Charlus, whose heart was pierced by all these cruelties.
It was simply a sign of irritation and shame.
Unfortunately for M.
Morel shrugged his shoulders.
As a conclusive argument, M.
de Charlus ought to have changed his tactics.
But which of us is capable of that?
Moreover, if M.
It was not always so, however.
The dear girl readily assented.
I then asked M.
I felt M.
de Charlus’s eyes anxiously absorbed in some plan.
he said to me.
You will excuse my sealing this note.
But I must.
While you are away, I shall write to my seconds.
You must thank her on my behalf.
I was extremely sorry for M.
If poor M.
Hallo, old boy!
I have nothing to do all evening.
Do let’s spend it together.
I’ve brought you a note from M.
At this name all his gaiety vanished; his face tensed.
he can’t leave me alone even here.
I’m nothing but a slave.
Old boy, be a sport.
I’m not going to open his letter.
Tell him you couldn’t find me.
Wouldn’t it be better to open it?
I suspect it’s something serious.
Not on your life.
It’s a dodge to make me go and see him.
Well, I’m not going.
I want to spend the evening in peace.
But isn’t there going to be a duel tomorrow?
de Charlus had given him and which littered his room.
de Charlus said in yet another: Non mortale quod opto.
But I had no time to examine them all.
he exclaimed, this is the last straw!
But where am I to find him?
Heaven only knows where he is now.
A few minutes later we reached the café.
I noticed M.
In doing which he had not been altogether wrong.
For to make his lie more plausible, M.
In the meantime M.
What are you doing here?
he said to him.
de Charlus was wild with joy.
Oh, how dreadful, exclaimed Charlie.
I don’t know.
I imagine so.
It was all that M.
de Charlus wanted.
He did not however yield at once.
Mounet-Sully in Oedipus, cack!
And at the mere thought of it M.
What a tempting spectacle it would be for a painter.
I replied that he was not in the neighbourhood.
de Charlus suggested that he might be summoned by telegraph.
And they occur perhaps once in a century.
But if M.
So tender a proposal overcame M.
de Charlus’s final hesitations.
100 or a certain place.
Verdurin’s footmen: Isn’t he the Baron’s mistress?
At length M.
A gloria would be distinctly appropriate to the place, eh?
And also to the occasion, what?
I am President of the Anti-Alcohol League, replied Cottard.
So Mme Cottard remained standing while she talked to M.
de Charlus and her husband.
But are you sure I’m not disturbing you?
Mme Cottard inquired timidly of M.
Presently the party broke up, and then M.
What a triumph for him!
How proudly he reared his head!
What joy he felt at having understood me!
This reconciliation gave but a temporary respite to M.
de Charlus’s torments.
As far as the money was concerned, M.
I believe that at such moments M.
de Charlus were concerned.
There’s the very thing I want.
Maineville strikes me as being far more agreeable.
However, tastes differ; anyhow I intend to remain here.
Mme Cottard, won’t you come along with me?
It’s an ideal setting for you.
Anyhow, I’m going to take up residence there.
That’s not to be sneezed at.
But frequently M.
For a whole month he placed himself at M.
Come and see M.
de Charlus after his classes?
Even after two o’clock in the morning?
the Baron asked.
Besides, algebra can’t be of any use to you.
I like it.
It soothes my nerves.
de Charlus said to himself.
Can he be working for the police?
In some way or other M.
That’s all right.
I’ll see to it, dearie, Jupien assured the Baron.
In that of M.
Jupien’s mission had proved successful.
Let no more in.
Open the door again, these gentlemen want Mademoiselle Noémie.
She’s expecting them in the Persian parlour.
Alarmed though he was, M.
For she herself had to go.
However, it’s not very interesting just at present.
It’s amusing, isn’t it?
she laughed—You’re glad you came?
Even the miracle of a whispered word did not occur.
When he had been sent away so that M.
de Charlus, which was placed a little behind the rest.
Thus was M.
The hierophant was not even conscious of my absence.
All the same, I’m sorry for your sake.
When shall I be carving again?
It needed the armistice, in fact.
The sadness of M.
None, he said.
de Crécy to carry the joke so far.
He comes of a very great family, M.
de Montsurvent said to me one day.
His patronymic is Saylor.
At Hermenonville M.
Living all the year round at Beausoleil, M.
de Chevregny had remained more provincial than they.
It’s called Pelléas et Mélisande.
This was not M.
She said to me: Bring your delicious—charming—nice cousin.
They felt they must invite her to dine.
They threw in Cottard as well, because M.
If he preserved with regard to M.
Blindly and foolishly, for not only were M.
The violinist, who before meeting M.
Which is unsavoury.
de Charlus again interrupted me: Say rather, Mme de Mortsauf.
The train stopped and Brichot got out.
Didn’t you see us making signs to you?
What do you mean?
I thought that it must be malice on their part.
Unfortunately he accepted several invitations to lunch with her.
de Charlus on one occasion without him.
and Mme Féré.
But they were so afraid of displeasing M.
But, whatever happened, the Cambremers wished to spare M.
de Charlus the sight of M.
As for M.
de Charlus was going to make on them.
It chanced that Mme Féré did not know him.
and Mme Féré that Morel saw M.
de Charlus at every hour of the day.
After a few weeks, they were scarcely on speaking terms.
de Charlus it was rather difficult.
One oughtn’t to make such allegation.
You’ll make him highly popular in the Army!
In medio … virtus, ah, I forget the exact words.
It’s a remark I’ve heard Dr Cottard make.
You ought to have a Petit Larousse here.
The two things are entirely distinct.
As for M.
I asked who.
My sister’s were terribly bad this morning.
you’ve been having them too, he said with satisfaction.
I shall tell her tonight.
What does Professor Cottard think about them?
I wanted to ask Albertine whether it was true.
Often, when M.
You mentioned to me Marcouville-l’Orgueilleuse.
Moreover, there were not only the Normans.
Their traces still remain at Gourville—Gothorumvilla.
Homme is holm, which means a small island, etc.
I think that is an exaggeration, said M.
Yesterday I was at Orgeville.
All these names are those of ancient lords.
Octeville-la-Venelle is a corruption of l’Avenel.
de Charlus with feigned alarm.
You hear, Doctor?
The Baron is afraid of officers passing over his body.
On one occasion however my watch was interrupted.
But make haste, for these quadrupeds are impatient.
In fact M.
Bloch said to me.
 Yes, Bloch went on, everybody sang your praises.
de Charlus utter those words.
He lives at Balbec?
No, they’ve taken a place near here, La Commanderie.
Having learned what he wished to know, M.
de Charlus pretended to despise Bloch.
But a Jew!
So your friend lives at the Commanderie, the wretch!
What is it?
No, it’s nothing, replied Brichot in alarm.
Where does your friend live in Paris?
We could not enlighten M.
Oh, isn’t that the last word in perversity!
Rue des Blancs-Manteaux!
To think that these White Mantles polluted by M.
And the street has always housed religious orders.
That is where M.
Bloch ought to reside.
How curious it all is!
What a family!
Just like a Yid!
We might have taken advantage of this prolonged halt, M.
Couldn’t you fetch him back?
he pleaded desperately.
Thank you, thank you, Morel murmured.
It might have swept them clean.
On every other occasion his presence did not torment me.
But they came up to our carriage.
It was merely M.
I know my sister could never stand it.
She would come back in a fine state!
Tomorrow you’ll hardly be able to stand!
And before that?
What, you hadn’t had an attack for a fortnight?
Do you know, that’s simply marvellous.
We have nothing to say to each other?
We really must settle it.
I’m relying on you.
Others had come simply to buy newspapers.
de Criquetot or the Khaire of Brichot.
I also had to have things out with Albertine.
You won’t forget that you’re coming to call for me.
What is this pleasure?
Well, this friend oh!
not at all the type of woman you might suppose!
I always call them my two big sisters.
But I’m dropping with sleep.
Very well, then, though I don’t in the least understand.
Why didn’t you tell me sooner?
I’ll stay, though.
Gradually, the lifeless sky took fire.
She will be here in a moment.
And presently, sure enough, in came Albertine in her dressing-gown.
Listen to me.
Her old habits would be reviving.
It was Mlle Vinteuil’s friend who remained my chief preoccupation.
Yes, it was from there that Albertine came.
Won’t you come with me?
that wouldn’t be possible just at present, Albertine replied.
It is possible.
There are moments when it appears to me probable.
You see, I came very near to marrying her.
But you must be mad.
Ah, if I were in her shoes!
Not at all, she is very kind, far too kind.
Then you decline my invitation to come to Paris?
My aunt wouldn’t like me to leave just at present.
In Paris everybody will know that I’m not your cousin.
Very well, then.
We can say that we’re more or less engaged.
Albertine left me in order to go and dress.
But this was not to happen for some hours.
I had not got there yet.
What a deceptive sense sight is!
And similarly with the soul that inhabits it.
Within us, in regions more or less superficial.
I heard myself weeping.
Was it all only a dream, then?
Alas, I was wide awake.
But I had ceased to think of this resemblance.
It wakened me.
But how is it that you aren’t in bed?
And your eyes are filled with tears.
What’s the matter?
But what difference can that make?
What, I wouldn’t dare to spit on that old monkey?
It seemed, indeed, itself almost unreal, like a painted view.
That’s no reason for you to cry like that.
It’s not that.
But that too is nothing.
I don’t feel well here, I’d rather go home.
But listen to me, don’t be too distressed.
This is it.
1 Altesse, like majesté, being feminine, takes the feminine pronoun.
5 Vert = spicy, risqué.
6 Marquis d’Hervey de Saint-Denis: a distinguished French sinologist.
8 A popular tune from Offenbach’s Les Brigands.
9 Better known under his pen-name Saint-John Perse.
11 Jachères = fallow land; gâtines = sterile marshland.
14 Untranslatable pun.
15 Monseigneur is the formula for addressing royalty.
18 Tapette can mean both chatterbox and nancy boy.
19 Idiomatic expression meaning the moment of reckoning.
The manuscript has a longer version of M.
The love of beauty which caused M.
How different are our fates!
And yet both of you are flowers.
Indeed one evening, at a dinner party to which M.
She had only to hear M.
This love of hers for M.
Isn’t she infatuated with a man who has bizarre tastes?
That’s the most dangerous way.
But let me give you a piece of advice.
Whenever you come across a Dreyfusard, just scratch a bit.
But he’s forgotten his curling tongs, said the valet.
He can go and get them, suggested the valet.
I haven’t the time, he moaned.
Would Monsieur le Baron like him to come in, then?
Tell him he’s a brute, a scoundrel.
I turned into this cul-de-sac so that M.
de Charlus should not see me.
Give me a second before I get in, M.
de Charlus said to Jupien.
My moustache isn’t ruffled?
No, you look superb.
You’re kidding me.
Don’t use such expressions, they don’t suit you.
They’re all right for the fellow you’re going to see.
Ah, so he’s a bit loutish!
I’m not averse to that.
I realised from all this that if M.
He got into the cab with M.
Are you never free except in the evenings?
Only on Sundays.
you’re free on Sunday afternoons?
That makes everything much simpler.
Do you like music?
Do you ever go to concerts?
Yes, I often goes.
very good indeed.
You see how nicely we’re getting on already?
I really am delighted to know you.
We might go to a Colonne concert.
Yes, my cousin Philippe de Coburg—you don’t know him?
I’ve often wanted to live out there.
There’s nowhere more beautiful in the whole of Paris.
So it’s agreed, then: we’ll go to a Colonne concert.
We can have the box closed.
What concert-hall do you go to on Sundays?
the Baron repeated, slightly irritated.
But I prefer to stretch me legs a bit.
I don’t like Mayol.
He has an effeminate manner that I find horribly unpleasant.
On the whole I detest all men of that type.
Have you ever been to a museum?
I only know the Louvre and the Waxworks Museum.
I returned to the Princess, bringing back her letter.
You’re going to hate me, she said.
The carriage was still there.
How shall we arrange it?
I’ll speak to him about it.
Jupien got out with the conductor.
Well then, what did I tell you?
Ah, I wouldn’t mind a few evenings like that!
He isn’t a priest?
No, not at all.
It’s not him?
No, not him either.
I recognised him all right.
You’re talking rubbish, said Jupien.
I’ll call round tomorrow about the rendezvous.
He’s nice, most agreeable and well-mannered.
But what’s his hair like?
He isn’t bald, I hope?
I didn’t dare ask him to take his cap off.
I was as nervous as a kitten.
What a big baby you are!
You vicious thing!
He wants to be well thought of at work.
I walked round to M.
de Charlus’s house.
He had not yet returned.
I left the letter.
de Charlus in the cab.
Doubtless the Princess’s heart would have beaten wildly in anticipation.
One single glance from her eclipses all our griefs.
Discovery concerning M.
Reflections on the laws of the vegetable kingdom.
Meeting between M.
de Charlus and Jupien; amatory display.
de Charlus’s revelations on the peculiarities of his amatory behaviour.
The race of men-women.
The Charlus-Jupien conjunction a miracle of nature.
de Charlus becomes Jupien’s patron, to Françoise’s sentimental delight.
Numerous progeny of the original Sodomites.
Reception at the Princesse de Guermantes’s.
My fear of not having been invited.
The Duc de Châtellerault and the usher.
The Princess’s social technique.
I look for someone to introduce me to the Prince.
de Charlus’s chattering.
de Vaugoubert; his amatory tastes; Mme de Vaugoubert.
de Charlus on show.
Mme de Souvré and the cowardice of society people.
Failure of my clumsy request to M.
de Bréauté effects the introduction.
The Prince’s reserved but unaffected welcome.
He takes Swann into the garden.
The Hubert Robert fountain.
A chat with the Princess.
The Turkish Ambassadress.
The Duchesse de Guermantes’s eyes.
My progress in worldly diplomacy.
Diplomatic Sodoms; references to Esther.
Mme d’Amoncourt and her offers to Mme de Guermantes.
Mme de Saint-Euverte recruiting for her garden-party.
A slightly tarnished duchess.
Mme de Guermantes’s rudeness to Mme de Chaussepierre.
Different conjectures about Swann’s conversation with the Prince de Guermantes.
The Duc de Guermantes’s strictures on Swann’s Dreyfusism.
Mme de Guermantes refuses to meet his wife and daughter.
Mme de Lambresac’s smile.
Beauty of Mme de Surgis-le-Duc’s two sons.
Mme de Citri and her nihilism.
de Charlus absorbed in contemplation of the Surgis boys.
Swann: signs of his approaching death.
Saint-Loup’s changed attitude towards the Dreyfus case.
Curious conversation between Swann and the Prince de Guermantes.
Swann’s concupiscent stares at Mme de Surgis’s bosom.
Swann invites me to visit Gilberte.
The Princesse de Guermantes’s secret passion for M.
Departure and return home.
Mme de Gallardon.
Return home in the Guermantes’ coupé.
The Duchess’s refusal to introduce me to Baroness Putbus.
Visit from Albertine.
Françoise and her daughter.
I await Albertine’s arrival with growing anxiety.
A telephone call from Albertine.
This terrible need of a person: my mother and Albertine.
How Françoise announces Albertine; the latter’s visit.
The Duc de Guermantes’s conversion to Dreyfusism.
Social visiting before my second trip to Balbec.
I continue to see other fairies and their dwellings.
Mme de Montmorency.
My second stay in Balbec.
The hotel manager’s malapropisms.
My dream, my awakening and my heart-rending memories.
An invitation from Mme de Cambremer, which I decline.
My grief, however, is less profound than my mother’s.
Her resemblance to my grandmother.
Meeting with Mme Poussin.
Further revelations, from the manager: my grandmother’s syncopes.
Another dream about her.
I suddenly decide to see Albertine.
Apple-trees in blossom.
Resumption of intimacy with Albertine, and first suspicions.
Sudden return of my grief in the little train.
Albertine’s visit to Balbec.
The Princesse de Parme.
My links with Albertine’s friends.
Albertine fails to turn up one evening.
Painful curiosity about her secret life.
The memory of Odette’s character applied to Albertine.
Her daughter-in-law’s two forms of politeness.
She has forgotten her Legrandin origins.
Albertine comes up to my room.
The hotel staff and money.
Albertine denies having had relations with Andrée.
Reconciliation and caresses.
Excursions with Albertine.
Brief desires for other girls.
Why the latter likes the hotel.
My friendship with two young couriers; their language.
Nissim Bernard and the tomatoes.
I go to Doncières with Albertine.
A fat, vulgar, pretentious lady on the train.
Albertine and Saint-Loup.
de Charlus appears on the platform at Doncières.
His first meeting with Morel.
An evening with the Verdurins at La Raspelière.
The little train and its habitués: Cottard, Ski, Brichot.
Social development of the Verdurin salon.
Cottard and the Verdurin Wednesdays.
The handsome unknown girl with the cigarette.
Mme Verdurin has invited the Cambremers, whose tenant she is.
Remarks of the faithful about the Cambremers.
Mme Verdurin and the death of the faithful.
Beauty of the countryside.
The Verdurins’ indifference to the beauties of nature.
Arrival of Morel and M.
de Charlus; evidence of the latter’s femininity.
Mme Verdurin and social etiquette.
The Cambremers’ garden.
de Charlus’s momentary mistake about Cottard.
The name Chantepie.
Combination of culture and snobbery in Mme de Cambremer.
de Cambremer takes an interest in my fits of breathlessness.
My mother and Albertine.
More etymology from Brichot.
The Norwegian philosopher.
Verdurin bullies Saniette.
Conversation about Elstir.
de Charlus’s claim to the rank of Highness.
The Verdurins’ attitude to Brichot.
de Charlus’s historical anecdotes.
Mme de Cambremer’s musical snobbery.
Brichot holds forth.
de Charlus and the Archangel Michael.
de Cambremer discovers the identity of Professor Cottard.
Mme Cottard dozes off.
A game of cards.
The arms of the Arrachepels.
de Charlus expresses a preference for strawberry-juice.
His first skirmish with Mme Verdurin.
Renewed outburst by M.
Verdurin against Saniette.
Cottard and du Boulbon.
de Cambremer’s tip.
Mme de Cambremer’s good-bye.
The squinting page.
Sleep after a visit to La Raspelière; reflections on sleep.
de Charlus dines at the Grand Hotel with a footman.
His strange letter to Aimé.
Excursions with Albertine.
Through the forest of Chantepie.
Presents for Albertine.
Virtues of the motor-car.
Visit to the Verdurins.
The views from La Raspelière.
Charm of social life in the country.
Other customers of our chauffeur: Charlus and Morel.
One of their luncheons on the coast.
Morel’s cynical projects and the Baron’s sensual excitement.
My obsession with Albertine.
A loving couple.
My increasing jealousy: the Rivebelle waiter.
Remonstrances from my mother and their negative effect.
A lesson in the use of words from the lift-boy.
Weariness of life with Albertine.
Morel, the chauffeur, and Mme Verdurin’s coachman.
Morel’s change of attitude towards me; his composite character.
de Charlus in the little train.
He becomes temporarily the faithfullest of the faithful.
de Charlus’s blindness.
Discussion between Brichot and Charlus about Chateaubriand and Balzac.
de Charlus’s discretion about his favourite subject in Morel’s presence.
Albertine’s clothes, inspired by Elstir’s taste, admired by M.
Morel’s admiration for my great-uncle and his house.
de Charlus’s Balzacian melancholy.
Morel reminds me of Rachel.
de Charlus’s fictitious duel.
Morel dissuades him.
Cottard, an alarmed but disappointed second.
Morel’s demands for money.
The stations on the Transatlantic.
The de luxe brothel at Maineville.
de Charlus gets wind.
Discomfiture of the Prince de Guermantes.
Grattevast: the Comte de Crécy.
The turkeys carved by the hotel manager.
Origins of the Crécy family: Odette’s first husband.
de Chevregny: a provincial with a passion for Paris.
Mme de Cambremer’s three adjectives again.
Unsatisfactory relations between the Verdurins and the Cambremers.
Brichot’s secret passion for Mme de Cambremer junior.
and Mme Féré.
The long drive between the station and La Raspelière.
More Brichot etymologies.
Brief visits from friends at various stations.
A misunderstanding with Bloch.
de Charlus’s interest in Bloch.
I feel it would be madness to marry Albertine.
Albertine’s revelation about Mlle Vinteuil and her friend.
Recollection of Montjouvain.
I take her back to the Grand Hotel.
Solitary misery until dawn.
Albertine consoles me.
I ask her to accompany me to Paris.
Reflections on love.
I tell my mother that I must marry Albertine.
Copyright © 1993 by Random House, Inc.
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions.
Published in the United States by Random House, Inc.
Modern Library is a registered trademark of Random House, Inc.
Chatto & Windus, London, in 1992.
and in Great Britain by Chatto & Windus.
Revisions by D.
The Captive first appeared in The Modern Library in 1941.
The Sweet Cheat Gone in 1948.
Proust, Marcel, 1871–1922.
The captive; The fugitive/Marcel Proust; translated by C.
Moncrieff & Terence Kilmartin; revised by D.
Charles Kenneth, 1889–1930.
Dennis Joseph, 1920–.
Proust, Marcel, 1871–1922.
Series: Proust, Marcel, 1871–1922.
A la recherche du temps perdu.
He was wrong.
And he who heeds it is a fool.
I would ring for Françoise.
I would open the Figaro.
Then I would read Mamma’s letter.
She was imbued with the tradition.
I had supposed that you were related.
She herself laughed at my lavish generosity.
Did I never tell you that she says that.
Oh, she’s quite a type!
Celeste’s curious genius alone might perhaps appeal to me.
But why, Celeste, I would say, why deity?
But why perched’ on a bed?
Can’t you see that I’m lying in bed?
You never lie.
Who ever saw anybody lie like that?
You’ve just alighted there.
By him, or he must call me to his side.
Physically, too, she had changed.
I would inquire where she was thinking of going.
But now my heart is pledged to another.
Thus I could without anxiety remain at home.
What, you never knew?
said Albertine, but we were always joking about it.
We used to look at one another and laugh.
Thus she would say in any connexion: Is that true?
Is it really true?
But her questioning air: Is that true?
Is it really true?
Is it really true?
Now Paris provided just as many opportunities as Balbec.
Who will ever know?
Is she the kind of woman that I object to?
Oh, not at all, quite the opposite.
We’ll wait as long as you like, until you’re ready.
This was not true.
Communicating doors, long barred, reopened in my brain.
And not of these alone.
Every day she seemed to me less pretty.
Pain alone kept my wearisome attachment alive.
The accessories of costume gave Albertine enormous pleasure.
What are you staring at me like that for?
said Leon, I bet you don’t know who I am.
The peasant admitted as much.
Well,’ said Leon, I’m your Prince.
said the peasant, taking off his cap and apologising.
I thought you were an Englische.
He must be mad.
In saying this M.
de Norpois was not being untruthful; he had simply forgotten.
These change, and with them our memory undergoes alteration.
As for society people, they remember very little.
For the following reason.
Actually, his anger never cooled.
broke in Oriane, he can spare me his wit.
Your story doesn’t hold water.
If that’s what you call witty!
Anyhow, it earned M.
Cartier was given a positive roasting by La Trémoïlle.
Drumont seems to maintain.
Still, those are all things of the past.
Would it be possible for me to see it?
Of course; Hannibal has to be going in a moment.
But I never dreamed of going to a small dressmaker.
that’s one of Fortuny’s.
I must write to her for the loan of it.
But you had such charming shoes as well.
Were they Fortuny too?
It was amazing.
You might be able to have a pair made here.
Both aspects were to be observed simultaneously when M.
A single outburst had marred this daily custom.
But he said, in reply to M.
If Morel addressed M.
Thus, at about this time M.
Ever yours, PIERRE.
de Charlus sometimes went.
de Charlus was secretly delighted by this familiarity.
He even brought M.
And yet, heaven knows M.
de Charlus did not care to go about with M.
Oh, that messenger from the Galeries Lafayette, what a dream!
Good God, there’s the head of the Commercial Department.
I hope he didn’t notice anything.
de Charlus was speechless with rage.
Were this true, it would be in no way surprising.
Morel had told M.
Nothing pleased him better.
A young seamstress received in society?
the reader will exclaim, how improbable!
For these reasons, M.
Moreover, the girl herself was delightful, and M.
Charlie interpreted these expressions of M.
de Charlus literally.
What, you will say, M.
In the first place—the paramount reason—Morel was there.
They deceive themselves.
Among the reasons which made M.
de Charlus’s wishes a wider target, an easier hold.
de Charlus more than anything.
And their happiness is diminished by this prudent reticence.
de Charlus had forgotten this confession.
What was more, Morel had quite possibly forgotten it himself.
His violin would suffice, together with his allowance from M.
This was wholly unnecessary.
Nissim Bernard to lend him—five thousand francs.
From that moment Morel had worshipped Bloch.
As he said this his eyes blazed.
Not content with asserting that Bloch and M.
It is true that M.
de Charlus and Morel.
What, are you back already?
You don’t think she’s up to any mischief?
Not at all, she’s writing to her aunt, I think.
How stupid of me!
Anyhow, I believe Françoise has gone out shopping.
Oh, you’ve only got to ring the bell.
Albertine will let you in.
Besides, Françoise may have come back by this time.
I said good-bye to Andrée.
Ever since that day, she had concealed everything from me.
I’d be amused to meet her.
But she’s what you call a bad type.
Precisely, that’ll make it all the more fun.
One ought always to take advantage of that period.
In that way, nobody knows anything about it.
She’s looked in for a minute to say hello.
I’ve just spent two delightful hours reading.
What an enjoyable book!
I’d have something to say in the witness-box!
Her eyes sparkled.
What did they talk about?
Buy some wool?
Yes, it was Albertine who asked me to get it.
All the more reason not to have gone.
I would reply, breathing again.
Andrée was perhaps in league with Albertine.
But do we remember it correctly?
Then Bloch could promise nothing because he knew nothing.
Her mouth would become bitter.
Who was it?
she would ask with an artless, avid interest.
Then the time would come for her to leave me.
I admired upon it the outspread wings of an eagle.
It was my aunt who gave me it, she explained.
She can be quite nice sometimes after all.
She had become extremely intelligent.
Had either of them a real feeling for me?
And, in themselves, what were Albertine and Andrée?
In herself was she one more than the other?
She was moreover forced to acknowledge that M.
de Charlus was a tyrannical presence at all their meetings.
Lately, however, her judgment had been completely reversed.
Our relations had a simplicity that made them soothing.
Thereafter she lay motionless.
Races, atavisms, vices reposed upon her face.
I seemed to possess not one but countless girls.
Sometimes it afforded me a pleasure that was less pure.
Ambition and fame would have left me unmoved.
Even more was I incapable of feeling hatred.
Are you coming with us tomorrow, old crosspatch?
she would ask before leaving me.
Where are you going?
That will depend on the weather and on you.
But have you written anything today, my little darling?
Could I possibly be mistaken?
Couldn’t I tell my little goose’s footstep among a thousand?
You’re so nice and pink in all that white lace.
Yes, but don’t put on your dressing-gown yet.
Sometimes I ended by falling asleep by her side.
The room would grow cold, more wood would be wanted.
And each day was for me a different country.
How much more fully did I possess Albertine today!
Those morning concerts at Balbec were not long past.
From whom then had I learned it?
Oh, yes, from Aimé.
It was a fine sunny day like this.
The worthy Aimé!
He was glad to see me again.
But he does not like Albertine.
Not everybody can like her.
But how did he know?
he had met her, had thought that she was badly-behaved.
What had he meant by bad behaviour?
But no, perhaps he had meant Gomorrhan behaviour.
Who was the other girl?
Where had Aimé met her, this odious Albertine?
I no longer gave a thought to Mlle Vinteuil.
Who could this girl be?
I should so enjoy insulting them.
Cuckolded husbands who know nothing in fact know perfectly well.
But how many others consist of two diametrically opposite periods!
Albertine always adopted a dubitative tone for irrevocable decisions.
But she had detected it.
What something else?
Which somebody else?
Anxiety is born afresh, and love.
Afraid of losing her, we forget all the others.
I have said: How could I have failed to guess?
These means of action are not wanting, alas!
But all this was supererogatory.
And no doubt such repose is worth a high price.
She refused them, she says.
Besides, is there any need to know a fact?
Is there any possibility of error?
I had not yet reached this stage with Albertine.
This was Françoise’s dearest wish.
Andrée was in fact engaged in talking to someone else.
And I realised the impossibility which love comes up against.
But we cannot touch all these points.
But we grope for them without finding them.
Hence mistrust, jealousy, persecutions.
Is that you?
But that’s just where she’s supposed to be going.
Then the feeling that she is bored by us returns.
Such are the revolving searchlights of jealousy.
Just as you like.
Once this period has begun, we are perforce vanquished.
I was still a long way from this state.
I felt that part of Albertine’s life eluded me.
We love only what we do not wholly possess.
I did not remind her of her lie.
But it shattered me.
And once again I postponed our rupture to another day.
Here I mean by love reciprocal torture.
Thus who can be more nerve-racking than a neurotic?
The evening was drawing to a close.
Neither of us had yet taken the initiative.
I’ve seen her photograph, I continued angrily.
I could no longer say: I’m unhappy.
I waded knee-deep in painful platitudes.
But perhaps it was not too late after all.
No, there was nothing.
Sometimes indeed the human voice was added to that music.
Albertine would murmur a few words.
How I longed to catch their meaning!
I concealed my emotion.
You’re dreaming, I’m not Andrée, I said to her, smiling.
Oh no, never, she said.
And her sleep was indeed that of a child.
But her childlike grace was more striking.
It was Winkles, winkles, a ha’porth of winkles!
It may seem strange.
Here’s the setter!
For pots or cans, oh!
I’m your man.
Françoise brought in the Figaro.
What insolent mortal comes to meet his doom?
Was it for you this stern decree was made?
I know, I know, don’t be frightened, said Albertine.
As a matter of fact, I don’t adore you.
Just think, Albertine, if you were to have an accident?
Of course I did not wish her any harm.
I know you wouldn’t survive me for forty-eight hours.
You’d kill yourself.
Thus did we exchange lying speeches.
You don’t mind all that noise outside?
she asked me.
Personally I love it.
But you’re such a light sleeper.
Our will would not be adequate for this task.
We have slept too long, we no longer exist.
Bring me my coffee.
By force of will, I had reintegrated myself with reality.
But already my bodily warmth was returning.
It was a long way.
Fortunately, her argument with the policeman was prolonged.
I overtook the carriage which was still stationary.
This part of the avenue was lighted by street lamps.
The driver became visible.
But then it is no longer the same.
Then I would be overcome with a feeling of sadness.
Already this dream was beginning to fade away.
I have always been cowardly enough to choose the former.
It is like youth and love, never to be recaptured.
Straight from the boat, oysters, from the boat!
I’ve been simply longing for some!
mussels, said Albertine, I should so like some mussels.
Lovely cos lettuce out for a walk.
At tuppence a bunch.
exclaimed Albertine, cabbages, carrots, oranges.
Just the things I want to eat.
Do make Françoise go out and buy some.
She shall cook us a dish of creamed carrots.
It’s so good!
Very well, my little darling.
It’s such fun.
And the dessert grapes from Fontainebleau: Best chasselas for sale.
Then you’re going out?
she said with a look of mistrust.
I may perhaps go out, perhaps not.
You know quite well that I never make plans beforehand.
I’m boring you, good-bye my darling, she said.
What’s the explanation?
I wasn’t to call for her after lunch.
I said, making an effort to conceal my dismay.
And I returned upstairs.
Then I need fear nothing.
Never fear, he said to me.
Anyhow, she didn’t see me.
No, she was alone all the time.
This suspicion never even occurred to me.
This seemed to her quite natural.
Then this fancy passed like the rest.
Here’s toys for your lasses and lads!
And I pocket the pelf.
Tralala, tralala, tralalee.
No, for what followed was: Here comes the china restorer.
I repair glass, marble, crystal, bone, ivory and antiques.
Here comes the restorer.
The greengrocer’s girl would not call until much later.
I began to read Mamma’s letter.
You’ll see, she’s just like a Little Red Ridinghood.
Have I got to lead you by the hand?
The divergence, there, is at its minimum.
We are sculptors.
It’s very pretty.
She replied: It’s my sweater.
You see, Sunday’s the only day we’ve got.
But won’t you catch cold, going bare-headed like that?
The flood of my anguish came pouring out in torrents.
She’s a very nice person.
Why, of course, everybody knows that!
But that’s neither here nor there.
I was not even aware whether Albertine knew her.
No matter, it came to the same thing.
What was one’s mistress’s expression when she told one that?
I could easily have taken your message.
I can always find time.
Now my only thought was of Lea.
A danger seems perfectly avoidable when it has been averted.
She caused my ills like a deity who remains invisible.
My note was probably not superfluous.
Cruel, most of all, to myself.
They take shape, accumulate, pass unnoticed by oneself.
one’s day-dreams advanced unobtrusively, scarcely noticed by oneself.
No, Françoise, I think it’s I who am ungrateful.
You don’t know how good she is to me.
All right, I’ll hop it, double quick.
Her daughter’s influence was beginning to contaminate Françoise’s vocabulary.
I was now ready, but Françoise had not yet telephoned.
Should I set out without waiting for a message?
She wasn’t angry?
Humanity is a very old institution.
The ideas you get into your head!
What a Marcel!
What a Marcel!
Always and ever your Albertine.
I was more of a master than I had supposed.
I no longer felt the slightest impatience to see Albertine.
Could life console me for the loss of art?
A twofold diversity.
which is not a scholar’s precaution but a musician’s cadence.
This joy moreover never forsakes him.
I went on playing Tristan.
For instance, he placed himself entirely at M.
In this M.
No doubt M.
Gradually my agitation subsided.
Albertine was on her way home.
I would hear her ring the bell in a moment.
What, another new ring, Albertine!
Your aunt is generous!
I don’t even know whose it was before.
But it was still far too dear for me.
And here it is.
That makes a great many rings, Albertine.
Anyhow, this one’s very pretty.
But my eyesight isn’t good enough.
I can’t make it out either.
What did you think of the Trocadéro, you little gadabout?
It’s by Davioud, I believe.
But how learned my little Albertine is becoming!
It is indeed by Davioud, but I’d forgotten.
While you’re asleep I read your books, you old lazybones.
As a building it’s pretty lousy, isn’t it?
You know what is meant by impressionism?
How wonderful you are!
There, you see!
But how did you come across the Mantegna reproduction?
You’re absolutely staggering.
We arrived at the Bois.
But the goddesses do not allow us to approach them.
Deprived me, did I say?
Midinettes, schoolgirls, actresses, how I should have hated them all!
They composed the beauty of the world.
They had at one time composed that of Albertine.
Gradually she had lost her beauty.
All round her hissed the blue and polished sea.
Elsewhere, a numerous band were playing ball.
Then we returned to the car.
We had told the driver to take us home.
For Albertine, this also meant returning to my home.
True, in order to possess, one must first have desired.
Certain incidental circumstances seemed to corroborate my supposition.
What is it?
Something to do with some young friends of hers.
I did not cross-examine Gisele.
Of what use would it have been to me?
And of course Albertine’s lies pained me more.
Not evidence of the reality that the lie conceals.
For instance, I admired Albertine’s paintings.
It’s true, she said, I wasn’t having drawing lessons.
But I never lie to you now.
And so I contented myself with kissing her.
For instance, I pitied M.
But all this is only a comparison.
Albertine was not mad.
Unfortunately the expression of such feelings is not contagious.
The case of an affected old woman like M.
At times the artist reveals this object in his work.
But medicine has developed the art of prolonging them.
Nature would not have offered them so long a tenure.
Now in society there is nothing but conversation.
But Bergotte’s nightmares were not like that.
Bergotte tried them all.
One’s heart beats as at a first assignation.
In what way is one going to fall asleep?
Will it lead to illness?
To blissful happiness?
who proved too strong.
The circumstances of his death were as follows.
That’s how I ought to have written, he said.
He was dead.
Dead for ever?
Who can say?
I have added what she admitted for the following reason.
I acknowledged her greeting out of politeness.
I walked a little way with her.
But there’s never been anything between us.
There never will be.
But is this absolutely certain even then?
Our butler was cast in a similar mould.
Constantly the butler would say: I’m sure M.
That’s what comes of chasing the ladies at his age.
You can tell what he is by his trousers.
This morning, Madame sent me with a message to Neuilly.
le Baron de Charlus go in.
And she must be eighty if she’s a day.
The point is however highly debatable.
She pleaded that she had no suitable clothes.
Besides, my hair is so awful.
My aunt thinks it ages me, she added glumly.
Would that her aunt were right!
It was Morel.
She may forget, perhaps, he said.
But I myself can never forget.
de Charlus might throw him out.
To lose all the Baron’s money was a serious thing.
Not only did the sacrifice of his position with M.
I went up to him on foot.
They—the spectacles—were in marvellous condition.
What, so you know that old story, do you?
Swann’s death had deeply distressed me at the time.
We learn with deep regret that M.
He belonged also to the Union and the Agricole.
He had recently resigned his membership of the Rue Royale.
The funeral will take place, etc.
so you were in a carriage, he said gravely.
Only by the purest accident.
I never take one as a rule.
I always travel by omnibus or on foot.
We shall be packed rather tight.
But you are always so kind to me.
I heartily accept, replied Brichot.
But she forbade them to go on visiting M.
Irresponsibility aggravates faults, and even crimes, whatever may be said.
Even then, it is not always so with these writers.
The subject of a psychiatrist’s study often rebounds on him.
de Charlus in the most secret recesses of his being.
Now it overflowed into his speech.
A fine example.
I say, Brichot, you do go the pace!
A vice so M.
Conscious of the curiosity that his peculiar characteristics aroused, M.
though this deliberate camping, against which M.
At the same time one could tell that M.
Is Charlie already here?
Brichot asked M.
de Charlus as we were about to ring the door-bell.
You know, I’ve no idea what he does.
Have you seem him lately?
I asked M.
I guessed at once that M.
However, on the whole it must be said that M.
And yet her letter to Morel whom M.
or Of course you’re one of us, you pretty sweetheart.
eh, my little white puss, revealed to M.
As far as M.
de Charlus that he was studying music in Germany.
She can do whatever she likes!
Who’d waste time and money tailing her?
He is the very best of good fellows, M.
It was of men alone that M.
Women inspired in him none whatever.
He’s extraordinary, he would continue.
It’s becoming such a bore!
And always pretty women too.
Not that it’s anything to be wondered at.
As for other young men, M.
There’s so little decent music written for the violin.
It’s a godsend to find something new.
And abroad they appreciate that sort of thing enormously.
One might even consider a libretto.
Oh, this evening is only to be a little rehearsal.
But it will be much more distinguished this evening.
Like an angel, I tell you.
They killed the young woman.
The Baron was not so innocent in his implacable vindictiveness.
Since you know Bergotte,10 M.
What, my dear fellow, didn’t you know that?
You’ve clearly never noticed my gullible side.
I’m as happy as a queen.
In doing so, M.
As for M.
You don’t abuse their hospitality!
Do you hear that!
He goes out with his cousin!
What a most particularly pure young man!
de Charlus to Brichot.
You are free to do anything that amuses you.
We merely regret that we have no share in it.
Ask Brichot, she quite turned his head at Douville.
Shall we be seeing her this evening?
She really is extremely pretty.
Here I must remark that M.
In this respect M.
I always regretted that M.
de Charlus never wrote anything.
Those merits are not on the same plane.
Nevertheless I believe that if M.
But after all, who knows?
de Charlus went on apropos of Albertine.
We shall regret your cousin’s absence this evening.
Vinteuil’s music is admirable.
I’m even a trifle worried about my guests.
But my anguish was becoming visible.
Why, what’s the matter with you?
said the Baron, you’ve turned quite green.
de Charlus’s words had awakened in me.
Many others had penetrated my mind already.
But what can they do?
Is not it curious that I should have hesitated?
Albeit you are people whom one may acknowledge as friends.
Verdurin jumped down his throat, was now continuous.
inquired the Baron, who detected a criticism in the adverb.
As we entered the Verdurins’ hall, M.
I begged him not to do anything of the sort.
His face, so far from disseminating, dispelled every scandalous rumour.
Will you be returning to Incarville this year?
Brichot asked me.
de Charlus with the dictatorial and uncomprehending egoism of benevolence.
No, no, she died at six o’clock, exclaimed Saniette.
Oh you, you exaggerate everything, was M.
Verdurin asked him.
What’s that you say?
Verdurin with a stern expression.
 Charged with the cloakroom’?
Are you going gaga?
In charge of the cloakroom’ is what we say.
You madden me, you do, cried M.
Verdurin in a voice of thunder.
How you do wheeze!
Have you just walked up six flights of stairs?
The effect of M.
There’s system for you, there’s competence.
That’s right, my lads, said M.
Come and warm up in the drawing-room.
Charged with the cloakroom,’ indeed.
What an idiot!
Verdurin retorted sourly.
Morel had just declined because M.
Failing a grievance, he would try ridicule.
Doesn’t it make you ill?
It’s all right for navvies!
Those of M.
de Charlus with Morel were not innocent.
It was only the fact that M.
That hour was, however, about to strike.
de Charlus was making him play.
de Charlus, finding him intelligent, continued to see.
His social career was at an end.
It was only too clear that M.
Him, therefore, you may invite; I authorise it.
The first was that M.
They’re not even dukes, he would exclaim.
What was more, with M.
Goodness gracious me!
In addition to this, certain persons whom M.
Reinach and M.
Hervieu are in league, she would say.
But there it certainly broke down barriers.
The Dreyfus case had passed, Anatole France remained.
To revert to M.
She was disappointed and furious at his veto.
Yes she was, put in M.
Do me the justice to admit, said M.
Verdurin, that I never approved of the association.
I always told you that she had a bad reputation.
But I’ve never heard a thing against her, protested Saniette.
No, but it has nothing to do with that.
I couldn’t myself explain what I feel.
This was how it came about.
And he greases my nose before the music begins.
The effect is radical.
Sometimes a little conjunctivitis, that’s all.
It’s completely efficacious.
Otherwise I could never have gone on listening to Vinteuil.
I was just going from one bronchial attack to another.
I could not refrain from mentioning Mlle Vinteuil.
The latter came up to greet me.
These, according to M.
It is more probable that the way in which M.
And there is nothing extraordinary in this.
In the meantime I was surrounded by enchantment.
There were several present, very pretty ones, whom I knew.
They sent smiles of greeting to me across the room.
The air was thus continually embellished with charming girlish smiles.
One remembers an atmosphere because girls were smiling in it.
At the moment, no.
She called my carriage most charmingly.
I’d gladly have prolonged the conversation.
Really, you found her as nice as that?
But he’s gone off to Poland.
Ah, that’s a bit far.
You never know, he may come back.
One always meets again somewhere.
I don’t mean any harm to Charlus, far from it.
Otherwise, she went on, I shall bare my teeth.
Upon my word, he keeps the boy cooped up!
Perhaps even until a later occasion.
What caused M.
Having come there partly out of friendship for M.
What, that woman with the white hair?
But she looks quite presentable.
the sonata-man’s daughter?
Show me her.
look at that mug, look at that phizog.
There’s a sight for sore eyes.
The rulers to whose court M.
The latter, believing her own position to be unassailable—M.
She knew that M.
It must however be said in fairness to M.
To my mind, M.
Where was I to place it?
Who was the composer?
She did not say this.
I looked at the musicians.
Indeed, he seemed to be present.
Of his life as a man solely?
Was it not as unreal as life itself?
But it could shock.
Other more agreeable people chatted for a moment with me.
Refreshments were handed round.
Did you get my note?
Can you come?
But would it ever be attainable to me?
de Charlus committed the same error as on their arrival.
Were you at Eliane de Montmorency’s yesterday, cousin?
Underneath were written the two less gracious words: Czech Quartet.
I am sure she will be gratified.
Mme de Mortemart swooned with laughter, in which M.
de Charlus joined.
Oh, that, now, is quite impossible.
You will remind me that my dancing days are done.
Nor was M.
But I have seen neither coffee nor ice.
What curious little objects, with so ill-defined a purpose!
While saying this M.
She shall be taught.
laughed the guest, she couldn’t have a better teacher!
She is lucky!
it was sublime.
One of those pleasures which can never be forgotten.
Oh, he’s ghastly, replied M.
You mean my protégé, M.
For instance: Dear Edith, I’ve been missing you.
You know that you are always welcome in our house.
I undertake to ask Gilbert to arrange everything.
Nothing will be done except through me.
Her eyes assumed an uneasy expression.
Is this rather bright light bothering you?
No, not at all.
Good evening, Madame de Montesquiou.
It was marvellous, wasn’t it?
I didn’t see Helene.
Then he turned to a third lady.
de Charlus belonged.
de Charlus to her house.
But above all M.
The remainder of M.
de Charlus’s guests drifted away fairly rapidly.
Nobody paid the slightest attention to Mme Verdurin.
de Charlus, saying: How clever Palamède is at arranging things!
The latter was already blind with fury when M.
I think you have reason to be.
It’s a historic event.
de Charlus the fan which was lying on a chair.
Oh, how moving!
de Charlus, approaching the relic with veneration.
For the M.
I shall bequeath it to a museum.
he added with a shout of laughter.
Anyhow, you see that for my sake she came.
And that is not the only miracle I have performed.
However, everyone must be given his due.
Charlie and the rest of the musicians played divinely.
Your name will not go unrecorded.
Nothing is negligible in so complete a realisation.
Everything has its part.
The Duras was marvellous.
She was the one person not to have here.
de Charlus was doing the lady justice.
But does it exist anywhere?
Vinteuil’s septet had seemed to tell me that it did.
She’s a fool; never invite her again.
After all, she’s nothing so very wonderful.
The Duchesse de Duras was enchanted.
She even asked me to tell you so, added M.
How often, even at La Raspelière, hearing M.
What a windbag!
He really is the most colossal windbag?
But this time it was far worse.
Intoxicated by the sound of his own voice, M.
It’s the last time they’ll set foot in this house.
my dear General, M.
Good evening, my dear, delightful friend.
Trying to get away without saying good-bye to me, eh?
Wasn’t it really beautiful?
The andante, what?
It’s the most touching thing that was ever written.
Charming of you to have come.
Hoyos was delighted.
I didn’t manage to see the Ambassadress.
Was she pleased?
They shock him terribly.
He declares that their morals are appalling.
Brichot seemed to hesitate.
What is one to do?
It’s no joke, I can tell you.
She doesn’t hesitate to strike at the roots.
She’s an interventionist, as our friend Cottard would say.
He’s completely mad about that boy.
However, I’m not at all sure she won’t fail.
It was often thus with Mme Verdurin and her faithful.
Performing a masterpiece in front of those nitwits.
But the others.
it’s enough to drive you mad.
After all, I’m no longer a schoolgirl.
Go along, Brichot, there’s no time to lose.
de Charlus: Shall we go and smoke a cigarette, Baron.
Wait just another minute, said Brichot.
Nothing could be simpler, said M.
You promised me, remember, not a word about Morel’s decoration.
And so I told Brichot and M.
de Charlus that I must shortly leave them.
Come, won’t you, he repeated.
Isn’t it simply beautiful, that adagio?
Do admit, Brichot, that they played like gods, Morel especially.
Ah, my dear fellow, then you saw nothing at all.
The whole room sat breathless.
And then all of a sudden, cried M.
And meanwhile, the graceful little quadrille of the allegro vivace.
Oh, that was indeed a solemn moment.
Forgive me for interrupting you, Monsieur, I said to M.
I should have been most interested to meet her.
Are you certain she was expected?
Oh, that I couldn’t say.
Let me go and fetch your coat.
His laugh was not, like M.
Verdurin’s, the choking fit of a smoker.
I expressed to M.
Not at all, he’s delighted.
He’s very fond of you, everyone’s fond of you.
Besides, he’s such a good fellow, Brichot, M.
I’m astonished at it myself.
de Charlus was intolerable to me.
Then the applause of the students broke out.
Brichot sometimes extracted from this attendance by M.
Yes, I will do that for you.
For always man proposes and God disposes.
things that have since happened would never have occurred.
Ah, yes, M.
I had so longed to hear stories about this duchess!
She asked the Duc de Doudeauville, M.
For the Duchess was extremely witty, said M.
But what on earth is he doing?
I would have done better to go myself.
However, you can put it over your shoulders.
I wanted to leave, but M.
The accolade, how absurd!
cried the Baron, in a shrill and rapturous tone.
I often wonder whether he doesn’t sleep with them.
I promise to let you know if she comes.
I shall hear of it from Mme Verdurin.
They’re quite notorious, you know.
Give me a single example of an undeserved reputation.
That’s all stuff and nonsense.
It’s the conventionalism of the boulevard theatre.
But this actress, then?
Does he have relations with the other three?
No, not at all!
They’re not at all friends in that way!
Two are entirely for women.
de Charlus himself, doubtless falsified his calculations.
Three out of ten!
Three out of ten!
Brichot repeated in stupefaction.
And it is true to say that M.
Three out of ten!
I’m not interested in history, replied M.
What, you knew Swann, Baron?
I didn’t know that.
Tell me, was he that way inclined?
Brichot inquired with an air of misgiving.
What a mind the man has!
So you think I only know men of that sort?
How do you expect me to remember?
You’re embarrassing me, he concluded with a laugh.
Besides he was always charming.
The women were madly in love with him.
But did you ever know his wife?
From that moment on she never let me go.
Though I only half deserved it.
What an idea!
Confess such a thing to Charles!
It’s enough to make one’s hair stand on end.
What I do not understand, M.
However, it was chiefly important for Morel to meet her.
It’s a nuisance that she’s gone.
However, I shall effect the conjunction one of these days.
It’s inevitable that he’ll get to know her.
Well, it’s to be hoped that that won’t happen.
he inquired of M.
de Charlus with a sombre air.
But not in the least!
exclaimed the Baron with bitter, dogmatic, exasperated irony.
But give us a few names, then, Brichot persisted.
de Charlus drew himself up with a haughty air.
What do you mean, among the Greeks?
Take the reign of Louis XIV.
Stop a moment.
But, my dear fellow, you’re as ignorant as a carp.
You are harsh, Baron, but just.
Deus bonus, quod tempus!
Imbre sumus perituri.
You’ll write it down for me, won’t you?
Bourget tells us!
She’s fairly explicit about it.
Such an interesting character, Madame, said M.
Nevertheless, our own is especially remarkable in that respect.
Whom everyone knows’ appeals to me immensely.
There’s also something special about them.
I could see that M.
The insistence with which M.
things have changed.
Nowadays they’re also recruited from among the most rabid womanisers.
Well, now I give up.
Then the Prince de Guermantes has those tastes too?
asked Brichot with a mixture of astonishment and dismay.
Good lord, replied M.
Why, of course, everyone knows.
He doesn’t even make any attempt to conceal it.
But he had his mistress there with him.
Well, and what difference does that make?
She’s charming, his mistress.
So then his three friends are like himself?
Now he’s gone to the other extreme.
youth; it gets everything wrong.
I don’t condemn these innovators.
I envy them if anything.
I try to understand them, but I simply can’t.
It’s because it represents something else to them.
It’s just the opposite.
It’s a disgrace, but I’m not exaggerating, my dear fellow!
Ah, my dear fellow, it’s the end of the world.
Everyone has become so malicious.
de Charlus occurred.
I simply must go, I said to Brichot.
While we had been talking, M.
We’ll see what she thinks of it all.
Verdurin reappeared with Morel, who seemed extremely agitated.
He’d like to ask your advice, M.
Instead of replying to M.
I agree entirely with my husband.
How do you mean?
Put up with what?
If you’ve never heard anything, you’re unique in that respect.
Resolving never to speak to M.
Unfortunately for him this plan was doomed to failure, M.
A broken heart?
Dammit, time passes and things change.
de Charlus who was being criticised, but himself too.
In other words, people are pointing a finger at you.
This very evening I shall break with M.
The Queen of Naples has gone, hasn’t she?
Anyhow, you need feel no regret.
I don’t say that there aren’t one or two.
I’m sure she came here chiefly to please me.
Yes, yes, I know she was longing to meet M.
Verdurin and myself.
That is a house in which you might play.
Don’t go and make a bloomer like that!
That settled it.
There’s nothing like that for ruining a man’s future.
And people were beginning to say it of you.
But what do you mean by calling him my friend.
We’re not of the same class.
Say rather that he is my creature, my protégé.
It was a similar need that had impelled M.
Servant could not but offend Morel.
There are certain things that one doesn’t say in public.
He told you that!
Verdurin’s name was Gustave.
He’s really very sensitive.
Verdurin, acting the kind-hearted curmudgeon.
It’s Charlus who’s fond of him.
Now I realise the difference.
Leave me alone.
You know what I mean all right.
I’m not the first person you’ve tried to pervert!
Instead of which, an extraordinary thing happened.
And yet M.
His question was not even heard.
Accordingly, during the next few days M.
He had been insulted; he awaited an explanation.
He looked quite upset; there were tears in his eyes.
Ski says he had tears in his eyes.
Did you notice that?
said Mme Verdurin.
I didn’t see any tears.
Not an hour had passed, and now M.
Mme Verdurin made the Queen a curtsey.
Your Majesty doesn’t remember me.
Quite well, said the Queen, continuing to talk to M.
The Queen offered her arm to M.
Lean on my arm.
You may be sure that it will always support you.
It is strong enough for that.
It will be a shield to you.
It might have been assumed, in view of M.
He was almost moribund.
After having thought for a moment about the Verdurins, M.
It still flowed freely, but it had changed.
A relapse made him silent.
The person whom he awaited thus was Morel.
But, notwithstanding these human lapses, the moral purity of M.
de Charlus’s conversation had none the less become charming.
But then why did he gamble?
Anyhow, this is the result.
Six thousand five hundred.
But he’s greatly attached to his home.
So be it.
You can imagine that I thought of that.
But will he believe it?
She consulted Cottard about her will.
In that way we wouldn’t even appear.
He won’t talk.
Nevertheless, at the moment of my discovery, M.
Then he spoke to me about M.
Brichot did indeed have an affection for M.
Mérimée and M.
Renan, and his colleague M.
The Baron had not heard this last story.
Needless to say, it appealed to his orthodoxy.
de Charlus, to get pineapples like these!
Never have I seen him so ingenuously delighted.
What flatterers all these Sorbonnards are!
he exclaimed with rapture.
An old fright like me!
Oh, my youth!
We shall see that if M.
We had now reached my door.
The carriage drove off.
I remained for a moment alone on the pavement.
Another occasion was at La Raspelière, when M.
I know quite well you’re not jealous.
What difference does it make to me?
I couldn’t care less.
Wasn’t Mlle Vinteuil to be there?
Only Albertine, by saying: Wasn’t Mlle Vinteuil to be there?
I might be able to answer: Why, I’ve quite forgotten.
Of course I didn’t!
All the same, there was no harm in it.
He didn’t dare to mention it to you.
You see it’s not very serious, no great harm done.
But that wasn’t my fault.
I kept on imagining they were about to arrive.
Whatever happened, I did not wish to appear surprised.
It’s true that I did lie to you a little.
She met me at least twice at my friend’s house.
They prefer to say that they’ve never met me.
and Mme Verdurin to a grand dinner.
Albertine was several persons in one.
We hear things retrospectively when we have understood them.
Thank you for nothing!
Spend money on them!
What did you say, Albertine?
Nothing, I was half asleep and talking to myself.
Not a bit of it, you were wide awake.
No, I mean what you said just now.
Because I felt that my request was presumptuous.
To be allowed to give a dinner-party.
I continued to press her.
No, leave me alone!
I don’t know what I was thinking of.
I felt that I would extract nothing more from Albertine.
Now this was certainly another lie.
However, it was useless to insist at that moment.
But my memory remained obsessed by the word casser.
ce que je lui en ai cassé!
meaning I fairly gave it to him!
If she summoned me to her deathbed, I wouldn’t go.
There are some things it’s impossible to forgive.
What was it she meant by break?
Casser du bois?
Break, break, break.
It was this that she would have preferred.
She would feel it too degrading.
She appeared stunned, incredulous and desolate: Tomorrow?
You really mean it?
However, it’s the last night!
He’ll do that for me.
But, the next moment, what a blow she dealt me!
I was shattered.
It would hurt me too much.
For I was really fond of you, you know.
Of course I can imagine.
And do you suppose that I don’t love you!
It hurts me terribly to have to leave you.
It hurts me a thousand times more, replied Albertine.
The case of an affected old woman like M.
We never met him.
Then why did you say so?
But I knew you so slightly in those days!
It was before Balbec?
Before the second time, yes.
To what end?
To what end?
What other revelations have you got for me?
Once again she stared into space.
No, nothing else, she said at length.
And what a lie!
Thenceforward, a rendezvous is an easy matter.
Presently their legs were intertwined.
My two friends noticed nothing; I was in agonies.
Then what do you mean?
Oh, well, she was less free in her speech.
My discouragement might have persisted.
This subsided into a sort of tenderness.
Perhaps an unconscious reminiscence of lying scenes enacted by M.
And here was I foolishly destroying all that heavy life.
Yet I saw Gilberte only from time to time.
Whereas the whole of Albertine’s time belonged to me.
I promise I shall never see you again.
Anything sooner than see you cry like that, my darling.
I don’t want to cause you pain.
Since it must be, we’ll never meet again.
She changed in front of us.
It was most interesting.
Perhaps I shall go to Touraine, to my aunt’s.
Poor little room.
It had to be; you were unhappy here.
No, I assure you, it’s better for you.
For you, perhaps!
Why, of course.
That appals me.
Oh, it would be sweet of you!
I’m absolutely dead beat.
Most of all I’m very happy.
Do you love me a bit?
A hundred times more than ever.
But not, as a rule, at once.
It would so nice if you would.
Soon I began to hear her regular breathing.
I tried to understand Albertine’s true state of mind.
Which of these two hypotheses was the truth?
I had perhaps the right to reason thus.
For it was highly probable that the example of M.
This letter from my mother brought me back to earth.
I asked myself.
I’ve been dreaming, the matter is quite simple.
There is nothing in this peculiar to Albertine.
This thought brought me immense but short-lived relief.
But there is something beyond those facts that are reported.
Alas, all this did not set my mind at rest.
So there were yet others?
I sent this photograph back to Bloch.
How was she dressed in it?
Perhaps in a low-cut dress.
Who knew whether they had not been photographed together?
Françoise certainly never made any scenes with Albertine.
Had she maliciously left it lying in Albertine’s room?
In the dim light the bedclothes bulged in a semicircle.
If I had questioned M.
He would allow only English furniture and old silver.
But my seclusion had undoubtedly multiplied their friendliness tenfold.
Or rather I should not tell him so.
True, Albertine was far more of a prisoner than I.
de Charlus, from Lea to Morel.
Between the two states there was a real transmutation.
What glorious sunshine!
Even in literature?
Even in literature.
You told me she was a bad girl.
Didn’t she try to have relations with you?
She spoke to me about you.
But we did nothing at all.
Well, this novel beauty remains identical in all Dostoievsky’s works.
or the Virgin Mary at the moment when … etc.
I must confess that I didn’t understand.
It seems to me so different.
You shall go back to the pianola afterwards.
But I said it for two reasons.
The first is a special reason.
That is how Dostoievsky presents his characters.
Yes, but give me an example in Mme de Sévigné.
But did he ever murder anyone, Dostoievsky?
I don’t think so, dear Albertine.
I know little about his life.
It is because our soul, alas!
But he is a great creator.
But there are many other great qualities as well.
I know very few of his books.
I looked at her.
Nothing of that sort with me.
What are you thinking about, my darling?
Love is space and time made perceptible to the heart.
Observation counts for little.
It would have required an improbable collusion with Françoise.
But I could hear Albertine’s breathing.
Then I sat down on the edge of it.
Her sleep continued to flow with the same murmur.
I would kiss her and shake her.
The truth is the most cunning of enemies.
She needs it badly, she’s not looking at all well.
When did the accident occur, again?
I’m a bit muddled about it all.
He keeps me very late.
He may want to see me home.
Suddenly he is no longer free.
However, at least Andrée was going to leave Paris.
One of these days I would tell her.
Must then have cast into my troubled soul such dread.
Unmoved those lightnings starting from your eyes?
I felt ashamed of my violence.
Yes, my little Albertine, forgive me if I was violent.
She blushed: Yes, I knew that.
Why, of course I can swear it.
Her mendacity appalled me.
she replied: No, that I cannot swear.
But I had not given the matter enough thought.
Her face was ablaze with fury.
She’s a deadly bore.
I never want to go anywhere with her again.
But it left them intact.
I asked her forgiveness once more.
She replied that she had nothing to forgive me.
She had become very gentle again.
Albertine, I said to her, I’m not at all sleepy.
Undress, my darling.
No, I couldn’t possibly take off this dress here.
I shall undress in my own room presently.
Why, of course.
Suddenly we heard the regular rhythm of a plaintive call.
It was the pigeons beginning to coo.
This time I dared not call her back.
My very anxiety must be founded on something.
Why didn’t she kiss me?
At this my heart ached horribly.
I don’t care, I must have air!
At Combray, I had asked my mother to come.
This made me hesitate to call out to Albertine.
Gradually I began to feel that it was too late.
She must long have been asleep.
I went back to bed.
Is she up yet?
Yes, she got up early.
but where is she just now?
I expect she’s in her room.
Well, I shall see her presently.
Had I then myself entered into my last agony?
Was this the approach of death?
I did not even mention the yacht to her.
These outings had completely restored my peace of mind.
Albertine’s presence weighed upon me.
After all I have nothing to fear.
We stayed there a long time.
It was like the buzz of a wasp.
I wanted something to eat.
She approached us only if I asked for something.
Now Albertine could look sideways.
I studied the woman while we finished our meal.
Her stupidity even took her to improbable lengths of impoliteness.
Our carriage passed in through the Porte Maillot.
Albertine admired the moonlight.
Oh, I couldn’t say, I never knew her address.
Andrée never knew her.
She wasn’t one of our little band, now so scattered.
what would you do then?
Where else could I be so happy?
When she said: Ah!
if I had three hundred thousand francs a year!
This is their day and their hour.
But I thought you were cross with them?
Madame Verdurin has always been very nice to me.
They have their faults, but who hasn’t?
I sniffed its smell of petrol.
Means that to my subjects I remain invisible.
Yes, I must go, the time had come.
One has dispersed the storm, returned to a smiling serenity.
I didn’t know what I ought to do.
Mademoiselle Albertine has gone!
How ignorant one is of oneself.
Therefore it’s useless to torment myself.
And then she had gone.
I opened her letter.
Good-bye: I leave you the best of myself.
But what does that matter?
I should be lying if I did.
No doubt this meant giving up any thought of Venice.
Besides, Albertine is perfectly right about our marriage.
Mamma herself was saying that all this procrastination was ridiculous.
But she is afraid, by warning, of preventing.
How many possible hypotheses!
And indeed she had found Albertine on the balcony.
This is the only fact; that was all.
People leave you for a reason.
They tell you the reason.
They give you a chance to reply.
They don’t run away like that.
No, it’s perfectly childish.
It’s the only really absurd hypothesis.
She seemed pleased at the suggestion.
I say my reason, not myself.
This other person was Saint-Loup, who agreed.
I suggested to him the following arrangement.
But does the girl in question know me, then?
I told him that I did not think so.
This plan of action filled me with indescribable joy.
He asked me whether I had a picture of Albertine.
At last I had found the photograph.
His face expressed a stupefaction which amounted to stupidity.
Is this the girl you love?
Often we know her already, as my great-uncle knew Odette.
And I was not unduly distressed.
Let us leave pretty women to men with no imagination.
But how much importance does all this have?
She’s as dishonest as all that?
If you’re right, three thousand francs would be enough.
And now Albertine has left him.
He doesn’t know what to do.
You think I’ve deliberately made all this up?
She too had her alternative hypotheses.
I met M.
He laughingly expressed his surprise at having provoked such anger.
But it is rarely unaccompanied.
It was a perfectly ridiculous amount to pay.
This was when I re-read a sentence in Albertine’s letter.
But this pain did not last long.
Nevertheless, I rejoiced at the thought.
At least that image was endurable.
By the end of the week she will be here.
Then, Manon, answer me!
I should have been only too delighted to come back.
I should have been only too delighted to come back!
This modifies it considerably, after all.
Dear friend, I was just about to write to you.
Life has driven us apart.
could have been unhappiness.
But I claim no great credit for resisting it.
Therefore I am not greatly to be pitied.
They will not remain so for very long.
When sterile winter glittered with ennui.
Alas, today is no longer either virginal or lovely.
The wheel of my chariot vespertine.
I retain a very pleasant memory of it.
It’s pure Sherlock Holmes.
What do you take me for?
But I foresaw none of all this.
I hoped that she would refuse to come back.
She was not certain how many stamps it required.
I opened the newspaper.
It announced a performance by Berma.
Hippolyte is about to leave.
They say a prompt departure takes you from us.
Would I have cast off all care for my honour?
Lady, Theseus is your husband, and my father?
You have understood me all too well.
Your misfortunes lent you further and fresh charms.
And yet we are right also.
But this would make me appear uncertain of her return.
Give them to me, I shall see about them.
Françoise handed me the rings with some misgiving.
I took the rings.
Monsieur must take care not to lose them, said Françoise.
They’re real beauties, they are!
Not from the same person!
What do you mean, the same eagle?
You’re talking nonsense.
A man’s head?
Where did Monsieur see that?
You can count every feather.
Oh, it’s a fine piece of work.
And on the inside of both was Albertine’s monogram.
I asked Françoise to leave the room.
I would have liked to see Albertine immediately.
But Albertine’s letter in no way advanced matters.
She spoke to me only of writing to the agents.
Don’t you agree that I’m right?
No doubt this influence is still making itself felt.
This incident was as follows.
It’s not difficult.
Saint-Loup replied callously.
Anyhow, I can put a spoke in his wheel.
In a shed one girl can hide with another.
She had regained her freedom.
My grief turned to anger with Saint-Loup.
Do you think it was easy!
They assured me that she wasn’t in the house.
But you’re not being fair; I did what I could.
But how could she possibly not have heard?
And she made no comment?
You ought to have repeated the offer.
How do you mean, repeat it?
But she didn’t.
Nevertheless I was tormented.
I did my best.
Try sending someone else.
And, after all, why should this not have been so?
More recently, had I not longed to go to Venice?
The suppression of suffering?
The suppression of pain!
Did I believe this?
She never came back.
It was from Mme Bontemps.
All our efforts to restore her to life were unavailing.
If only I had died in her stead!
My life to come?
Of course not!
I had indeed!
Françoise, who still knew nothing, came into my room.
On the contrary he’s going to be pleased.
Here are two letters from Mademoiselle Albertine.
I was not even glad, nor was I incredulous.
The second was dated the following day.
Is it too late for me to return to you?
Yours with all my heart, Albertine.
There, she had never been more alive.
So then my life was entirely altered.
I asked Françoise the time.
The day was drawing to its close.
But what did that profit me?
But would the broad plains be less painful to me?
when would the night end?
I was mistaken.
But this was no longer possible, for she was dead.
At that time I was not jealous of her.
Aimé seemed to me to be a suitable person.
In such we can have absolute confidence.
But did not others offer me greater confidence than Albertine?
With others, did I not have more extensive conversations?
She had gone, she was dead.
Even the famous 1.
train had not corresponded to my mental picture of it.
But she was dead.
I would forget her.
Unique, we suppose?
She is legion.
None of this is real life.
What was the good of all those futile miseries?
Why had she not made her admission complete?
Had she blushed?
It is as though they were travelling abroad.
This is a thoroughly pagan survival.
But that did not suffice me.
Life, did I say?
was more exacting still.
in italics or between inverted commas.
whenever she came to the baths.
She and Mlle A.
But Mlle A.
Apart from the lady in grey, the people Mlle A.
They never went in together, but Mlle A.
brought her in a lot of money.
The season promises well for this year.
What were her thoughts?
What were her loves?
Did she lie to me?
Had Albertine been unfaithful to me?
In what house?
On what day?
I could not tell.
This memory was a great comfort to me.
Especially as, after all, she had seen nothing.
Hence death does not make any great difference.
And she who was its object was dead.
These people had noticed nothing.
But, she said, the young lady never did anything more.
Have heaps of news for Monsieur.
I could still see the marks on the laundry-girl’s arms.
But Albertine was there to console me.
Of course I said to myself: Why torment yourself?
She isn’t telling herself that you know.
No doubt Albertine had never ceased to lie to me.
I no longer remembered.
No, she had no need to tell me anything.
I had the comfort of hearing this Albertine say so.
Besides, had I ever known any other?
But she lived in me.
Not only the sentiments, but the sensations.
It was not so.
I had not yet reached this stage.
Is she here?
One day I tried to interest myself in a book.
Incessant upheavals raise to the surface ancient deposits.
What had she been doing that evening?
Had she been unfaithful to me?
How important were those tastes to Albertine?
How large a place did they occupy in her thoughts?
The malady determines it and imposes it on us.
For the first time she seemed to me beautiful.
But I never did anything of the sort with Albertine.
I see nothing wrong in them, far from it.
However, I mentioned vaguely and at random the Buttes-Chaumont.
And besides, she’s dangerous.
And undoubtedly he exists.
Indeed, did I not know her dearest friend, Andrée?
All this was impossible.
What pretty hair she has!
Alas, perhaps Albertine had remembered it.
She alone could give me that happiness.
But they do not necessarily take the same routes.
Perhaps it is she!
But by this time the girl had vanished.
I found one, but it was too late.
I failed to overtake them.
My heart beat wildly.
But the concierge had not told me this.
I returned to his lodge and questioned him again.
She was busy at the moment scrubbing the service stairs.
Then began a day of wild excitement.
It was not the girl.
I could see however that it consisted only of newspapers.
I went to the window, and drew back the curtains.
I opened the Figaro.
What a bore!
This was really too bad.
I must write and complain.
But then came an initial anxiety.
But still, a few people would read it.
I did as they would do: I began.
Loud exclamations on the extreme Left.
In them it finds completion.
how could a reader possibly notice that?
Moreover, the name Guermantes existed for me in many forms.
train as though I had never taken it.
so you’ve met Mlle de Forcheville before?
I could see that you didn’t recognise me.
I recognised you at once.
He declared that he would adopt her.
I don’t get mixed up in all that.
de Bréauté and found the Duchess looking worried.
Otherwise there’ll be no society left.
The Dreyfus case is all very well.
And the Duchess laughed heartily.
Mme de Guermantes hated Mme de Nièvre.
I don’t express any opinion, I simply convey the message.
Just as you like.
What difference do you suppose it makes to me?
I see no objection to our meeting the child.
And you were perfectly right, replied the Duke.
Everybody knows that we were very fond of Swann.
People will think it quite natural.
And they set off together for Saint-Cloud.
We knew him very well, I remember him very well.
You remember, Oriane.
What a fine man your father was!
What excellent people they were, he and they!
I consider that she’s even far superior to him.
Think how well she told that story about the sea-bathing.
She has a vivacity that Swann never had.
but he was, after all, quite witty.
Elstir was now in fashion.
Gilberte recognised the technique.
They look like Elstirs, she said.
To my mind, they’re superior to his paintings.
Ah, yes, the Elstir that I admired upstairs.
It looks much better here than in that passage.
Did you happen to read it?
You’ve written an article in the Figaro!
In the Figaro, are you sure?
I can’t believe it.
That’s so, isn’t Oriane, there was nothing.
I don’t understand.
So you’ve written an article in the Figaro!
Come, Basin, you can read it afterwards.
I shall read it as soon as I get home.
He never does anything that other people do.
At that time he was called the Prince des Laumes.
Is there still a Prince des Laumes?
Why, no, the Duchess replied with a melancholy, caressing gaze.
Such a charming title!
One of the finest titles in France!
Ah, yes, I’m sorry too.
I’m from Les Laumes.
You’re from Les Laumes?
Why, I’m your Prince.
You’re an English.
It’s to you that I’m indebted for this, Basin.
Gilberte was becoming very snobbish.
I don’t know her personally, Gilberte went on.
No, not in the least.
He was the typical nobleman from Périgord.
I recited the opening words of the portrait: M.
de Bréauté for another reason.
And so Gilberte spoke of him and of M.
I’m afraid they haven’t long to live, either of them.
A fatuous breed!
What am I supposed to do about it?
replied the Duke.
It was in a plebeian hand and a charming style.
But a moment later my joy subsided.
For Bergotte had written me not a word.
I no longer loved Albertine.
I was suffering from a love that no longer existed.
It may well be that likewise our nightmares are horrifying.
Albertine had no cause to reproach her friend.
The Princesse de Parme barely greeted me.
I was extremely annoyed.
I shall never go near the Princesse de Parme again.
You’ve made me make a fool of myself.
Oh, my darling, it is in my heart!
he warbled to her, quoting the verses of Armand Silvestre.
The dead are sleeping peacefully beneath earth’s crust.
And so must sleep the feelings time effaces.
Do not lay hands upon their sacred traces.
It’s a bit outmoded, but how pretty it is!
What, you don’t know it?
Upon your eyelashes caressing and pure.
I had for my pride no further fear.
For just as long as you are able.
In his arms I slept like an angel.
They were being recited by M.
He was no longer on friendly terms with M.
I told Andrée this, caressing her as I spoke.
yes, but you’re a man.
They came to an understanding at once.
That was his passion, and Albertine’s too.
But Albertine suffered terrible remorse afterwards.
We were out of luck, and were very nearly caught.
She was already too remote from me.
We say to ourselves: If she were alive!
But it is a vicious circle.
In fact it is precisely the same thing.
But that day was still remote.
But another fact made an even greater impression.
But even this is not an irrefutable objection.
But that makes no difference.
You did those things in your grandmother’s empty apartment?
Oh, no, never, we’d have been disturbed.
Besides, Albertine chiefly liked doing it in the country.
She knew a house there.
In the grotto of the Petit Trianon, too.
There, you see; how am I to believe you?
I was afraid of hurting you.
Why had I believed them?
Lying is essential to humanity.
de Charlus a feminine delicacy of sensibility and mind.
I asked Andrée.
But my dear Andrée, why go on lying to me?
perhaps after she’d left you, that I can’t say.
These last words shattered me.
I had believed her.
When Andrée left me, it was dinner-time.
I call it three hours, but it was perhaps longer.
Well, who was it?
A person who never pays calls.
The Princesse de Parme?
Why, I have a cleverer son than I thought.
Did she apologise for her coldness yesterday?
No, that would have been stupid.
The visit itself was her apology.
Your poor grandmother would have thought it admirable.
I wrote to Andrée asking her to come again.
She was unable to do so until a week later.
Certainly not, it wasn’t that at all.
Then because I was too disagreeable?
No, I don’t think so.
But, my dear Andrée, you’re lying again.
But you’ve misinterpreted this note.
What is more, this anguish does not lack compensation.
But no one does believe in it.
But there was absolutely no reason for her to go.
All the pretexts she gave were false.
Paris would be a deadly bore at that moment.
We were all of us still at Balbec.
She’d certainly have won it.
It only meant staying on for another week.
Well, off she went at a gallop.
I often spoke to her about it later.
We would call for a gondola.
How your poor grandmother would have loved this simple grandeur!
Are the old people going to dine in their room?
They never let us know.
They’re not our sort of people.
de Villeparisis won’t be long.
It would, however, be an exaggeration to suppose that M.
de Norpois had entirely forgotten the traditions of diplomatic speech.
Did you call at Salviati’s?
Will they send it tomorrow?
I brought the bowl back myself.
You shall see it after dinner.
Let us look at the menu.
Did you send instructions about my Suez shares?
Here is the menu.
As a first course there is red mullet.
Shall we try them?
I shall, but you are not allowed them.
Ask for a risotto instead.
But they don’t know how to cook it.
Waiter, some mullet for Madame and a risotto for me.
A fresh and prolonged silence.
The angry volubility with which M.
But who knows and here M.
A gentleman who was finishing his dinner bowed to M.
Why, there’s Prince Foggi, said the Marquis.
But, of course you do—Prince Odo.
He’s the brother-in-law of your cousin Doudeauville.
Odo, is he the one who went in for painting?
It has been the dream of my life.
Yes, there she is, at the second table.
Then we can’t be counting from the same point.
Meanwhile, Mme de Villeparisis having asked M.
Now in this the Prince was completely mistaken.
Silence and an air of indifference had remained, in M.
Successors who would have a difficult task before them.
Then at once M.
We cannot say what exactly were Prince Foggi’s impressions.
Then he sent for Signor Giolitti, who accepted.
de Norpois shrewdly inquired, one read: M.
For, ever since the conversation had been made public, M.
Barrère’s assertion that everyone was up in arms.
His secretaries were worn out.
Perhaps by M.
de Norpois, perhaps by some other man of the hour.
This report is regarded as highly satisfactory.
Never has the public shown itself so admirably calm M.
The public asks optative nothing more.
We are assured that M.
upon the hinges of the prison door.
I tried to recall her image to my mind.
Death merely acts in the same way as absence.
Now it was the contrary process that had occurred.
Mine was healed.
The night went by.
I had finally ceased to love Albertine.
Obviously, it would be the same.
Its strength lies in its permanence.
Alas, I should never know.
The sun continued to sink.
My mother must be nearing the station.
The hour of the train’s departure was approaching.
My mother must by now have reached the station.
In a little while she would be gone.
The hours went by.
I opened it.
I had never received her telegram.
Perhaps she would refuse to believe this.
As for her capital G, it resembled a Gothic A.
How many words into the sentence?
Oh, it’s too incredible, said my mother.
It’s a marriage.
Robert de Saint-Loup is marrying Gilberte Swann.
I asked her.
We don’t deign to collect such hackneyed Sevigne.
I remarked with indifference, to whom?
Unless the bride’s personality supplies it.
And who is the bride in question?
But how do you expect me to know?
Is it someone brilliant?
But who in the world is this bride?
It’s Mlle d’Oloron.
Precisely, and M.
It’s she who’s marrying the young Cambremer.
It isn’t possible!
It’s the reward of virtue.
She was only a child then.
But your grandmother saw all that at a glance.
But you know, Mamma, it’s much more surprising than that.
Oh, a whore, you know, people were perhaps rather malicious.
I never quite believed it all.
Can’t you imagine her astonishment!
For optimism is the philosophy of the past.
This is what had occurred.
I, for my part, wondered why M.
I had not the heart to answer these letters.
And this was true.
He smiled a vague smile.
It’s perhaps the same man, he said to himself.
Who are they?
inquired the Princess.
With you one can talk freely.
This was the very thing.
The Princess then asked Legrandin to call.
He had taken up tennis at the age of fifty-five.
In proportion as M.
This velocity of movement had its psychological reasons as well.
Then the Princesse de Parme spoke of Mlle d’Oloron.
This accounted at the same time for Jupien.
Now this aspect was surprising for the following reason.
and Mme de Saint-Loup.
She was so kind and tolerant.
And the little Swann girl!
How it would have interested her!
What a lovely letter she would have written in reply!
Ah, that’s true, I hadn’t thought of it.
They’ll be his property.
But what do you mean?
She can’t be certain herself!
What harm can it do me?
But in an official document it’s not the same thing.
de Charlus’s life!
He has tried to break up the marriage—it’s really shameful.
But to take up with the nephew!
There are some things that just aren’t done.
I’ve never known how to order dinner!
Saint-Loup, on the other hand, did know how to order.
But it was not otherwise visible.
The first year Monsieur came to Balbec, M.
le Marquis de Saint-Loup and his mistress, whom M.
le Marquis was using as a screen.
Monsieur doubtless remembers that M.
She was leading him a regular dance.
For everything is at least dual.
Doesn’t it strike you?
They seem to me identical in some ways.
Not that Gilberte made any complaint.
In anyone else, his conduct would have left me indifferent.
de Charlus’s manner when he addressed certain men.
But Robert might easily have derived this from M.
But when did the change date from?
Now he was even odder than I had supposed.
Of course, after what M.
1 From Racine’s Esther, Act I, Scene 3.
IV, Sodom and Gomorrah, p.
6 Comic opera by Adolphe Adam 1836.
Morel’s use of the term is grammatically nonsensical.
9 Famous nineteenth-century tragedian.
12 Famous Parisian caterers.
371—to die during the Great War, in Time Regained.
IV, Sodom and Gomorrah, note 18 to p.
17 Thomas Couture, nineteenth-century French painter.
22 Slang for anus.
For an illustration of the narrator’s point, see Vol.
II, Within a Budding Grove, p.
24 Racine’s Esther again.
IV, Sodom and Gomorrah, p.
Mme d’Arbouville was the latter’s mistress.
31 Roland Garros: famous French aviator.
33 Sous-maîtresse: euphemism for a brothel-keeper or madam.
34 This passage is a little confusing.
35 Agamemnon in Offenbach’s La Belle Hélène.
At length she was unable to restrain an affectionate laugh.
Come with me, Titine.
You know I’m your dear little sister.
You wouldn’t kill yourself after all?
she said with a laugh.
I accept whatever fate has in store for me.
Saniette reappears further on.
Pretty well played, what!
Verdurin to Saniette.
What do you mean?
Aiming at what?
À la rigueur!
the man’s mad!
The term means with exactitude.
I’m saying that I can’t judge à la rigueur.
And I’m telling you to go away, M.
Saniette went off zigzagging like a drunken man.
For scarcely five minutes had passed after M.
Saniette had had a stroke in the courtyard.
But the evening was not yet over.
In fact Saniette was not quite dead.
This was the decision I made.
It made me think of myself.
Then he saw the lady appear.
and Mme de Villeparisis.
And once more there was silence.
de Norpois, she did not seem reassured.
Ah, but you always see the black side, said M.
de Norpois with some asperity.
You’re alarming yourself about trifles.
No no, don’t ask them for a soufflé, M.
de Norpois said, they’ve no idea what it is.
Perhaps we could ask for one of those.
What they give you here won’t be up to much.
Creamed eggs were so smooth and succulent, do you remember?
Life with Albertine.
Albertine and I under the same roof.
My mother’s disapproval.
My irregular sleeping habits.
Françoise’s respect for tradition.
Intellectual development and physical change in Albertine.
My confidence in Andrée.
I advise against a trip with Andrée to the Buttes-Chaumont.
I no longer love Albertine, but my jealousy subsists.
Ubiquity of Gomorrah.
The virtues of solitude.
I long to be free of Albertine.
Jealousy, a spasmodic disease.
Visits to the Duchesse de Guermantes.
What survives of the magic of her name.
The Fortuny dresses.
Attraction of the Duchess’s conversation.
Mme de Chaussepierre.
Digression about the Dreyfus case.
de Charlus and Morel chez Jupien.
Stand you tea.
de Charlus receives a note from a club doorman.
Natural distinction of Jupien’s niece.
Morel’s capricious sentiments and pathological irritability.
The syringa incident.
Waiting for Albertine’s return: pleasures of art.
Change in her since she has sensed my jealousy.
Andrée’s defects; her calumnies about I’m a wash-out.
Reports on her outings with Albertine.
Albertine’s taste and elegance.
Variability of the nature of girls.
Watching her sleeping, and waking.
My increasing resemblance to all my relations.
Bloch’s cousin Esther.
Albertine’s plan to visit Mme Verdurin.
I suggest other expeditions.
A fugitive being.
Françoise’s hostile prophecies about Albertine.
Telephone call to Andrée about Albertine’s visit to the Verdurins.
But can I trust Andrée?
I advise her to go to the Trocadéro instead.
The anguish of being deprived of her customary good-night kiss.
Her sleep again and her charming awakening.
Street sounds; the musical cries of the street-vendors.
Reflections on different kinds of sleep.
The chauffeur and the expedition to Versailles.
Nostalgia for little girls.
Lea is to perform at the Trocadéro.
How to prevent Albertine from meeting her?
I send Françoise to fetch her.
Awaiting Albertine’s return, I play Vinteuil’s sonata.
Music and introspection.
Reflections on the attitude to their work of nineteenth-century artists.
Morel’s mysterious occupations.
His outburst against Jupien’s niece: grand pied de grue.
Drive to the Bois with Albertine.
Similarities between desire and travel.
Alternations of boredom and desire.
Our shadows in the Bois.
My servitude and hers.
A meeting with Gisele.
The lies of the little band fit together exactly.
Albertine admits a lie.
I learn of Bergotte’s death.
His illness, prolonged by medical treatment.
At the Vermeer exhibition: the little patch of yellow wall.
Dead for ever?
Albertine’s lie about meeting Bergotte.
Her technique of lying.
The Verdurins quarrel with M.
I set off for the Verdurins’ in secret.
Encounter with a repentant Morel.
Meeting with Brichot.
The death of Swann.
Brichot evokes the Verdurin salon of old.
Arrival of M.
de Charlus, greatly changed.
Brichot’s attitude towards him.
Homosexuality and the refinement of artistic tastes.
de Charlus’s conjugal behaviour with Morel.
His detachment from social constraints.
Morel’s letter from Lea M.
Arrival at the Verdurins’ house.
de Charlus and the footman.
Saniette snubbed by M.
Verdurin for announcing Princess Sherbatoff’s death.
Mme Verdurin and the death of Princess Sherbatoff.
Her medical precautions against the effects of Vinteuil’s music.
Morel’s improved manners.
de Charlus’s furtive exchanges with several important guests.
Mme Verdurin draws up her plans.
The concert begins.
An unpublished work by Vinteuil.
Attitudes of Mme Verdurin, the musicians, Morel.
Mysterious promise of the music.
Art and life.
Vinteuil’s unique and unmistakable voice.
The artist’s unknown country.
Music, language of souls.
Final triumph of the joyful motif.
Mme de Mortemart puts out feelers for a musical soiree.
d’Argencourt and inverts.
Mme Verdurin’s growing rage.
The Queen of Naples’ fan.
de Charlus and General Deltour.
Verdurin tackles Morel.
Brichot reluctantly complies.
de Charlus’s remarks on Morel’s playing: the lock of hair.
He appreciates Brichot’s wit.
His attendance at Brichot’s Sorbonne lectures.
Mme de Villeparisis’s real social position.
Brichot and Charlus on homosexuality; M.
de Charlus’s statistic; Swann, Odette and her many lovers, M.
General observations on sodomy 404 et sqq.
Morel repudiates the Baron, who remains dumbfounded.
de Charlus away.
The Verdurins’ generosity towards Saniette.
Unexpected side to M.
Disappearance of Albertine.
Return from the Verdurins’ with Brichot.
The window streaked with light, symbol of my servitude.
Her admission about the supposed three-day trip to Balbec.
A mysterious and horrible Albertine reveals herself casser le pot.
My mendacious proposal that we should separate.
Albertine’s sleeping body: a mysterious allegory.
A letter from my mother.
Curiosity and sagacity of Françoise.
Albertine’s artistic tastes.
The Fortuny gowns.
Albertine plays me some music.
The profound truth of Vinteuil’s music.
Reflections on genius.
Key-phrases; the example of Dostoievsky.
My outburst of anger.
Interrogation of Albertine about her relations with Andrée.
Reconciliation, but no good-night kiss.
A presentiment of death.
We go out together.
Albertine and the pastry-cook.
Sounds and scents of spring; thirst for Venice.
I resolve to leave Albertine immediately.
Françoise informs me that she has just left.
Grieving and Forgetting.
Mlle Albertine has gone.
Hypotheses about the reasons for her departure.
Albertine in Touraine.
The little poor girl in my room.
Saint-Loup’s mission to Touraine.
His astonishment on seeing Albertine’s photograph.
Bloch’s indiscretion and my anger.
Summons from the Sûreté.
First furtive hint of forgetting.
My sleep is full of Albertine.
Furious, I cable to him telling him to return.
A letter from Albertine.
My mendacious reply.
The declaration scene in Phèdre.
The mystery of Albertine’s rings.
Another letter from Albertine.
His report on his mission.
New and unprecedented suffering.
Proliferation of memories.
The baths at Balbec.
Aimé’s mission of inquiry.
Alternation of odious suspicions and tender memories.
Our mistresses are the daughters of our anguish.
Lying words become prophetic truths.
Aimé’s letter confirming my suspicions.
His mission to Touraine.
Albertine and the laundry-girl; evocation of an Elstir painting.
Beginnings of recovery.
I grow accustomed to the idea of Albertine’s death.
Renewal of desire for other women.
The power of oblivion.
Mlle de Forcheville.
Three stages on the road to indifference.
A walk in the Bois on All Saints’ Day.
The three girls.
My article in the Figaro.
Visit to the Guermantes’.
The blonde girl: Mlle de Forcheville, in other words Gilberte.
The Duke reads my article.
Two congratulatory letters.
A new social self replaces the one that loved Albertine.
The Princesse de Parme’s visit to my mother.
Third visit from Andrée; a new explanation for Albertine’s departure.
Albertine and I’m a wash-out.
His attitude towards me.
Sojourn in Venice.
Third stage towards indifference.
Venice and Combray.
Mme de Villeparisis and M.
de Norpois, greatly aged.
The self that loved Albertine is dead.
My outings in Venice, alone or with my mother.
The Giotto chapel at Padua.
Evening walks in Venice.
Solitude, misery, O sole mio.
New Aspect of Saint-Loup.
Ups and downs of Saint-Loup’s engagement plans.
Disapproval from Combray.
Reactions of society people.
Opposite effects of the same vice in Charlus and Legrandin.
Change in Legrandin.
Mlle d’Oloron’s death.
The Muse of History.
A visit to Tansonville.
Saint-Loup’s infidelity; his relations with Morel.
Retrospective analysis of Robert’s sexual tastes.
Robert and Mme de Forcheville.
My tarnished friendship.
Biographical note copyright © 1992 by Random House, Inc.
Revisions to the translation copyright © 1992 by D.
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions.
Chatto & Windus.
Revisions by D.
Proust, Marcel, 1871–1922.
Dennis Joseph, 1920–.
Guide to Proust.
Series: Proust, Marcel, 1871–1922.
À la recherche du temps perdu.
Modern Library website address: www.
In recent years it was officially renamed Illiers-Combray.
A Note on the Revised Translation 1992 by D.
Why then should it need revision?
The editors, M.
Pierre Clarac and M.
In particular, MM.
I should like to thank Professor J.
Weightman for his generous help and advice and Mr D.
Enright for his patient and percipient editing.
But as a rule Gilberte came with me.
I found the Vivonne narrow and ugly alongside the towpath.
We chatted—very agreeably for me.
Not without difficulty, however.
But, next day, the order of their superimposition is reversed.
But in reality this is a mistake.
How I loved you then!
She replied: Why didn’t you tell me?
I had no idea.
I loved you too.
In fact I flung myself twice at your head.
The first time at Tansonville.
But in the meantime there’d been, after all, the Champs-Elysées.
Yes, but there you were too fond of me.
I felt you were prying into everything I did.
I asked her later.
It was Léa dressed as a man.
I pictured Gilberte again in my memory.
And I had known nothing!
The love of Albertine had disappeared from my memory.
Our legs and our arms are full of torpid memories.
And not finding it, I had called out: Albertine!
Gradually, just as M.
Not that he was in fact indifferent to her.
No, he loved her.
Morel imitated Bergotte marvellously.
Françoise, who had seen all that M.
You can be sure he’ll never desert him.
I am the first man in her life.
Don’t you see something of Rachel in her?
he went on.
Sometimes she went a great deal too far.
don’t you see?
She has done so much for me.
You can’t possibly know.
I have to pay my respects to my mother.
The Courvoisiers were more sensible.
If I said a word about it, Oh!
The things you speak of leave me cold.
These are the subjects you can talk to me about.
Gilberte could not give me any information on this point.
But it is absurd, improbable, nightmarish.
No, I have too bad a character.
I mean it.
Besides, I was engaged once.
Not in the least!
I said that?
No, I’m sure you’re mistaken.
Unless it was Gilberte who was lying to me.
one of the subjects he has painted.
Yes, honestly, jasmine.
He would have laughed at the idea himself.
He never learnt how to make a bouquet.
de Goncourt, a very great writer, equal to the greatest.
I closed the Journal of the Goncourts.
Prestige of literature!
But I felt vaguely depressed.
I would give anything for a sight of it!
I took him for a society bore, a mere dummy.
On the contrary he was a Distinguished Figure!
The vogue—and what could be more natural?
The faces were new themselves.
New names indeed there were in certain spheres.
Time was when M.
So the Dreyfusism of M.
we send him, etc.
For I never thought of her now.
In short, he was a very poor friend.
How can one sleep with all that round one?
I would rather have Dubuffe.
I saw a lot of Andrée at this time.
After all, what harm have I done her?
But women know how to adapt themselves.
It is too bad, Mme Verdurin would say.
Mémé de Charlus?
The classes of the intellect take no account of birth.
But the new drawing-room was not altogether disagreeable.
On these exceptional days all the houses were black.
Saint-Loup had just come back from Balbec.
It is all a question of chronology.
Personally I know nothing about it whatsoever.
I must admit, it would be very understandable.
Although short-sighted, he had been passed fit for service.
de Cambremer, he said to me, and added: Oh!
but of course, he is an old acquaintance of yours.
You know Cancan as well as I do.
In the case of M.
de Cambremer, I had known only the rind.
But he died the night before last.
My father has it from an absolutely first-class source.
Absolutely first-class sources were the only ones to which M.
de Guermantes could not have spoken otherwise.
The trouble is you’ve got the wind up.
Even in Paris you crawl on your belly before him!
Are we in for a long war?
I said to Saint-Loup.
No, I believe it will be very short, he replied.
But here, as always, his arguments were bookish.
See to it that your men are well turned out.
de Charlus had detested effeminacy.
de Charlus for refusing to wear brightly coloured cravats.
I shall certainly support his application, said Saint-Loup.
I had met this lift-boy airman a few days earlier.
de Charlus had … etc.
The lift-boy seemed surprised, he knew absolutely nothing about it.
He met my doubts with the firmest avowals.
She came often enough to find me, said the lift-boy.
I told her I found it wholly objectionable.
I don’t think you know him, you weren’t here then.
Victor, they called him.
Sixteen, Holy Mother!
In one way it’ll do some good.
A good blood-letting, you know, is useful now and again.
And then it will help trade.
I suppose it has to be done.
And then, the officers, what does it matter to them?
They get paid their screw, that’s all they ask.
He thought that what M.
She no longer slept, no longer ate.
actions which he celebrated as a succession of victories.
But we read the newspapers as we love, blindfold.
We do not try to understand the facts.
Altogether, it was a delightful letter.
It is in a state of perpetual becoming.
Geslin de Bourgogne, Galliffet, Négrier were dead.
He was a charming creature.
We had become close friends.
I arrived here at the same time as the Germans.
Everybody had tried to prevent me from leaving.
I was regarded as mad.
I was quite aware of the strength of this argument.
I felt that my place was by his side.
The end of the letter was absolutely truthful.
Françoise had searched everywhere.
What a pink!
And that pale green!
In some ways the simile was not misleading.
those were the days!
What a gulf separates us from them!
Having washed themselves on deep sea-beds?
An old revelation, he retorted instantly, or a future revolution.
How shocked your uncle Charlus would be to hear you!
He sees nobody, nobody invites him, she said to M.
Bontemps, whom she easily convinced.
Anyhow, there was an element of truth in these words.
The position of M.
de Charlus had changed.
The bad reputation which M.
But between his family and himself M.
de Charlus had multiplied quarrels.
What is his nationality exactly, isn’t he an Austrian?
Verdurin would ask innocently.
No, he is Prussian, the Mistress would say.
I mean it!
There’s something shady here.
All this stank to high heaven of espionage.
In this they were ungrateful, for M.
In short, people in society had become disillusioned about M.
de Charlus was most monstrously libelled.
Since the war the tone of these pieces had changed.
The articles themselves were cleverer than their ridiculous titles.
Bergotte’s writings had had not the slightest influence on Morel.
The flowers that it produces are, however, always sterile.
Admittedly she was indignant that M.
Grief is worn in the heart.
Mme Verdurin hung on to the survivors.
But, if M.
So the death of M.
Verdurin died and M.
As for M.
It is ridiculous to talk about the power of propaganda.
That of M.
de Charlus was complete.
Then again, M.
So the war for M.
Now tell me, M.
You may be sure that I am not exaggerating.
By the way, talking of Brichot, have you seen Morel?
I am told that he wants to see me again.
He has only to take the first step.
Unfortunately only the next day, to anticipate a little, M.
No doubt the remark which M.
But when M.
And if, when he saw M.
I was wrong.
So that Morel, who at the time when M.
It is a strange thing, M.
How curious it is!
I confessed to M.
Furthermore, he was as anglophile as M.
de Charlus was anglophobe.
And he regarded M.
de Guermantes tried to argue that M.
To return to M.
I am sure you will agree with me.
The last remaining seats will soon be sold.
Any further delay and it may be too late.
In the same way he invites France, etc.
No, the first year I did write, but once only.
But what would you have me do?
How could I?
In his own attitude to them nothing had changed.
Even at this moment, when M.
Now, what was I saying to you?
he went on.
Now I do not doubt that M.
Of course I mean to imply nothing dishonourable.
He likes me very much.
And at this stupid explanation M.
In this M.
de Charlus was right.
Well, what do you say to tonight’s Brichot?
I honestly think the man is going mad.
I haven’t read it yet, Cottard would say.
What, you haven’t read it yet?
But you don’t know what delights you are missing.
I promise you you will die of laughter.
Fashionable people are more foolish than is generally supposed.
You call that well written?
said Mme Verdurin.
You are right, Madame.
Well, my poor friend, M.
We hear talk of vandalism, of the destruction of statues.
But it is nothing of the sort.
I only hoped that M.
de Charlus would not mention Combray.
They have taken many home with them.
But this uprooted art, as M.
Combray was simply a small town like hundreds of others.
We had our chapel there, and our tombs.
You mean its symbol, Monsieur, I interrupted.
And I adore certain symbols no less than you do.
I understand what you mean, M.
de Charlus replied, and M.
What will men do when they return from it?
I wouldn’t want that.
I am very doubtful about that.
It is the most glorious day of my life.
Syveton, as if I were his inferior.
I have always honoured the defenders of grammar or logic.
So turns the wheel of the world.
I pointed this out to M.
de Charlus but succeeded only in arousing his mirth.
That is what happened to my great-uncle the Duc d’Enghien.
At every moment M.
They are heroes, there is no other word for it.
Are you afraid of the Gothas and the bombardment?
You are not afraid?
de Charlus repeated.
The people of Paris don’t realise the situation.
I am told that Mme Verdurin gives parties every day.
About two years after this evening, I met Morel.
I thought immediately of M.
de Charlus even once.
You are wrong, I said.
As for virtue, I don’t give a damn for it.
On the contrary, I am beginning to pity him.
It is not from coquettishness, which could serve no purpose.
No, it is not for any of these reasons.
He began to tremble in every limb.
I confessed that I did not understand him.
But what harm can he do you?
Good heavens, yes!
I know he is kind.
And wonderfully considerate, and honest.
The second incident dates from after the death of M.
My dear friend, the ways of Providence are inscrutable.
One of us two had to disappear.
I had decided to kill him.
God counselled him prudence to preserve me from crime.
Reading these words I understood Morel’s fear.
But the confession was true.
But I must return to my narrative.
Attachment to an object always brings death to its possessor.
True, Paris was not, like Herculaneum, founded by Hercules.
But how many points of resemblance leap to the eye!
I admire all the heroes of this war, he said.
It is not Rouen any longer, it is another town.
And our poilus!
This word probably signified for M.
Like me you may say your mea culpa.
We have been too dilettante.
Besides, I am too old.
One felt that poverty, dereliction, fear inhabited the whole quarter.
Was this hotel being used as a meeting-place of spies?
I was now, however, extremely thirsty.
How about you, Julot, d’you still mean to join up?
Anyhow, the chap’s already tied up.
Well, he is and he isn’t.
Tie me up like that and I’d soon untie myself.
But the padlock’s closed.
The trouble is the chains aren’t long enough.
Are you doing the beating tonight?
It’s not me, it’s Maurice.
But it’ll be me on Sunday, the boss promised me.
Can you tell me who is in charge here?
Will you wait a minute, the boss has gone out.
But you know he can’t be disturbed.
Do you think they will give me a room?
We’ve finished with the Zeppelins.
What d’you want to believe the papers for?
A mother and two children!
There’s been no news of big Julot lately.
Who is she, his godmother’?
Do they sleep together?
What an idea!
She’s a married woman, she couldn’t be more respectable.
She’s a real good sort.
Do you know him then, big Julot?
Do I know him!
retorted scornfully the young man of twenty-two.
You mean he says he’s a ponce.
But he’s no more a ponce than I am.
A present of five francs!
Some men are just too stupid to live.
Bah, that chap a ponce?
What a weight!
I told him that I wanted a room.
Just for a few hours.
I can’t find a cab and I am rather unwell.
But I should like something to drink sent up.
There’s 7 ringing again.
They say they’re ill.
Has anybody put a pair of sheets in 22?
There goes 7 again, run and see what it is.
Well, Maurice, what are you standing there for?
You know someone’s waiting for you, go up to 14b.
And get a move on.
How is it you’re so late?
the young man of twenty-two asked the chauffeur.
What do you mean, late?
I’m an hour early.
But it’s too hot in the streets.
My appointment’s not till midnight.
Who have you come for then?
said the young man of twenty-two.
Have pity on me.
It was Jupien.
Jupien did so with perfect unconcern.
We can’t be heard, can we?
It was Monsieur Eugène, he said to him.
Lebrun, then a whisper: He wants to be called M.
Lebrun but he is really Grand Duke X—–of Russia.
de Charlus to a young milkman.
He killed his sergeant.
But I don’t find him sufficiently brutal.
that is extremely interesting, said the Baron with a smile.
Would you care to try him?
Yes, certainly I should.
Was I to conclude that M.
In the case of M.
And in that case, M.
But nobody came.
But as M.
Yes, indeed, they’re fine blokes.
All these young men were patriots at heart.
What, finished already?
Does he say it will soon be over?
Shut your trap, you’re not the boss here.
Yes, I’ve finished, and I’ve come to pay.
It would be better if you paid the patron.
Maurice, go and fetch him.
But I don’t want to bother you.
It’s no trouble.
I gave him two francs for his pains.
He blushed with pleasure.
thank you very much.
I’ll send it to my brother who’s a prisoner.
No, he doesn’t have a bad time.
It depends a lot on the camp you’re in.
After all, what do we care?
And in this After all, what do we care?
Go out on to the landing, all of you.
He followed me, very agitated.
I explained to him why I had come.
Slow footsteps were heard on the stairs.
Only don’t move.
And pushing me into the dark, he left me.
He had no suspicion that M.
Everybody in the room seemed to know him, and M.
After a bit of brass, no doubt.
Just shows how faithful you are to me.
This remark gave M.
And how well he says it!
One would really think it was true.
What charming little eyes he has!
You will think of me in the trenches.
Things are not too bad there?
To the end!
If one only knew to what end!
What pretty hair he has!
he said, turning to Jupien.
By these touching sentiments M.
Pretty vicious, wasn’t it?
it was too late, the charm was dispelled.
And in this he was not simply being insincere.
Nothing is more limited than pleasure and vice.
Like his son, he was tall and good-looking.
de Foix the father.
And this was quite possible.
How simple he is!
Still, he’s on bad terms with his father, Jupien objected.
The car which had come to fetch M.
de Charlus was now heard to drive away.
The horrid creature apologised, put in his coin and disappeared.
The patron was there, so I paid him.
Going straight up to the patron: Who is this?
What does this mean?
he muttered in a quiet but angry voice.
I detest the intermediate style, he would say.
Bourgeois comedy is stiff and affected.
No half-way houses—either Phèdre or Les Saltimbanques.
To his house, what imprudence!
de Charlus is not a novelist or a poet!
But in the sphere of art M.
And the truth is that, when one knew M.
I say only Sesame.
In an instant the streets became totally black.
I set off, but very soon I was lost.
But my thoughts had turned to another subject.
They knew that they would not be alone there.
who ministered to their pleasures.
As for M.
how lovely it must have been!
She thought that I had been killed.
He had searched everywhere with Françoise and had found nothing.
In this she was mistaken.
So much for the value of evidence and memory!
In any case it was of no great importance.
It’s no use stuffing us with lies.
Holy Mother of the Angels!
Mary, Mother of God!
They will take your field away from you, Françoise.
God in Heaven!
She almost had doubts about the German atrocities.
He had been killed.
And then this is what happened.
Such a presentiment would seem, no doubt, to be impossible.
Yet death appears to be obedient to certain laws.
He must have been truly magnificent in those last hours.
And I was too unwell to write to everybody.
When I heard of her grief, I was touched.
He then told apropos of M.
de Charlus and M.
de Charlus and M.
d’Argencourt were soon released.
Arthur Meyer to pour out floods of tears and ink.
The train had stopped, I remember, in open country.
My heart has grown cold and no longer hears you.
I am in the midst of nature.
to a grown-up person.
Perhaps the very difficulty that M.
To receive the homage of M.
Jupien helped the Baron to descend and I greeted him.
There were, however, two M.
de Charluses, not to mention any others.
Antoine de Mouchy, dead!
Charles Swann, dead!
Adalbert de Montmorency, dead!
Boson de Talleyrand, dead!
Sosthène de Doudeauville, dead!
As we said nothing, it was to M.
For a time he could see nothing at all.
At least that must have made your surveillance largely unnecessary?
I used to assure him that they were all horrors.
Little rascal that he is!
He used to contrive to send me on urgent errands.
But, good heavens!
How little joy there was in this sterile lucidity!
A moment of the past, did I say?
Painful recollections are always of the dead.
But how, by what means, was I to do this?
But this thought did not for an instant detain me.
How many for this reason turn aside from writing!
This comparison was absurd.
At the beginning of the war M.
Nor is this all.
But my train of thought led me yet further.
I was at a concert the other day.
Then they started on the quartet.
By Jove, what a difference!
And I smell burning!
Something’s on fire.
It’s the most exasperating thing I’ve ever heard, damn it!
Nor was that all.
He remembers only things that are general.
those whom he has most loved.
what the outcome of the struggle would be.
For it is not necessary that rivals should really exist.
Unhappiness ends by killing.
Suffering sets them in motion.
My meetings with M.
And other peculiarities can have the same effect as inversion.
Finally, to a certain extent, the Germanophilia of M.
But this consideration does not in the least discourage us.
What could her sister be?
A housemaid perhaps?
Out of tact, we had never asked.
And yet, suppose we are wrong?
But it makes no difference.
And thereupon I remembered where I was.
a harbour full of masts and pennants.
de Charlus thunderstruck into humble politeness.
d’Argencourt had always inspired in me.
No more, alas, than they are intrigued by one’s own.
From this young girl, for instance, as from M.
And no longer in a zoological sense, as with M.
As for the woman whose lover M.
de Bréauté or M.
Her oldest friend!
I said to myself.
Surely she exaggerates.
But clearly it is the father we are talking about.
He is quite old enough to have grown-up sons.
A moment later he came into the room.
no, it’s usually only the young who get it.
A man of your age has very little to fear.
What do you mean, did I know the Marshal?
said the Duchess to me.
But then, you know I’m no longer a chicken.
These last words upset me.
But, who knows, perhaps after all it is fortunate.
And now I could observe the same phenomenon in Bloch.
I did not realise how much I had changed.
But for a brief moment he turned his head aside.
But surely they have become less frequent with age?
I replied that they had not.
I expect you’re glad to see him again, she said.
Yes, but how is he?
I replied, as though doubtful what answer I should receive.
Why, pretty well, as you can see for yourself.
Having been assured that M.
One of these was Legrandin.
Or perhaps less like a god than a ghost.
There were some people whose hair had not turned white.
Nevertheless, he appeared old.
He was an artist, moreover, who worked very slowly.
he said, taking me by the arm.
But if he was delighted, I was astonished.
I looked at him more closely.
Then I made an effort to remember.
I took M.
And then they did not even appear to have aged.
That was where, it seemed, she still might have been.
She looked like a rose that has been sterilised.
Odette would still have been able to act.
I complimented her on her youthfulness.
But most commonly they reproduced the features of their parents.
It’s quite unnecessary.
You wouldn’t find her at all amusing!
She’s best left alone in her corner.
She’s a bit gaga, you know.
And soon she would not defend herself even against death.
None at all.
But what was so different about them?
But that is impossible.
Swann is dead and M.
de Charlus is as good as dead.
But the differences were enormous.
Bloch seemed to guess what I was thinking.
This was correct.
This man was Morel.
She won’t come.
And what could be grander than that?
de La Rochefoucauld.
There was a M.
It was as good as a novel.
Loubet and M.
Reinach are brigands or that they are great patriots.
The Bloch who is such a friend of the Guermantes?
Bloch had come bounding into the room like a hyena.
But he was also twenty years older.
He was nearer to death.
What did this profit him?
And what would this profit him?
Lebrun and M.
That, though I did not know it, was M.
Now he went out of his way to be civil.
What has become of the Marquise d’Arpajon?
inquired Mme de Cambremer.
She died, replied Bloch.
A year ago!
We must talk about all that another time.
And indeed she was galloping towards her grave.
And I recognised Gilberte.
Alas, he never lived to see his prediction fulfilled!
Yes, that is true.
We simply do not know.
Thus Gilberte now had an inseparable friend in Andrée.
This explanation may be the true one.
We will summon the clan!
to a young woman what a mujishun you are!
Gilberte asked me.
But this was hardly because they had known Odette.
When, for instance, I mentioned Brichot, Tedious man!
Who does she think she’s fooling?
In Gilberte, who was more modern, it evoked no response.
I told Mme de Guermantes that I had met M.
While we were talking, Morel came in.
I never take sides in family quarrels, she said.
Don’t you find them boring, family quarrels?
But Rachel’s desire had possibly a more particular cause.
But the guests were in no hurry to arrive.
was what everyone in his heart of hearts had decided.
de X—– or M.
Nor was this enough.
I responded with a smile and a gesture.
Well then, who am I?
How curious it is to see Rachel here!
he whispered in my ear.
That is La Fontaine’s fable, isn’t it?
I am most flattered, most honoured by your appreciation.
Bloch’s friend asked her what she thought of Berma.
She didn’t recite poetry very well, did she?
hazarded Bloch’s friend, to flatter Rachel.
But how few of her listeners noticed this!
Society no longer had anything to teach her.
Good heavens, when was it that I saw you last?
But I quite soon grew accustomed to them.
Take away the happiness and leave the boredom to me.
But I preferred his old way of doing it.
I replied that she was a niece of M.
the Duchess exclaimed, turning to me.
You remember all that, of course.
How ancient it seems now, how far away!
Well,—this to Bloch—Bréauté was a snob.
In any case, it was there that you met Swann.
I don’t know how to describe him, she went on.
But does anybody today know who Mme de Varambon was?
Our friend here, yes, he knew all those people.
Good heavens, how long ago all that was!
One couldn’t possibly wear a thing like that now.
But it was pretty, wasn’t it?
Personally, I found it a charming fashion.
I thought they were gold.
How kind of you to remember that!
But I am not suggesting that she needed me.
You don’t agree?
Well, perhaps you are right.
They booed and they tittered.
At this moment an unexpected incident occurred.
here you are, it is so lovely to see you.
The Princess will be delighted.
If I had only realised!
She kept sending me card after card.
Besides, in what way had she done wrong?
The Duchess will be my witness.
So died Berma.
de Guermantes frequented.
Even among the Duke’s relations she now had her partisans.
Were not he and Gilberte heirs both to M.
He had not suffered quite the degradation of M.
It must be added that Odette was unfaithful to M.
We were having a heavenly life together.
This was quite true.
At that moment it started to rain.
No, I want your carriage but I don’t want you.
But the same evening he arrived on my door-step.
I am not speaking of M.
And perhaps this was true.
And why was she now so outspoken?
In this belief she was mistaken.
And so Mme de Guermantes was very unhappy.
It is true that M.
But I had never heard any gossip to this effect.
de Sagan or M.
I did not insist.
But she didn’t have a husband.
That is what you imagined, because they were separated.
In fact he was much nicer than she was.
He had died in the previous year.
exclaimed the Duchess.
You should not waste your time on her.
Then you will see what an extraordinary creature she is.
And after luncheon she will recite Verlaine for you.
You will be amazed!
She is a quite dreadful young woman.
Robert wanted to challenge him.
Do you think she felt any grief?
Why, she would fly at her throat!
yes, she replied, he was very proud of her.
Was she not—are not, indeed, the majority of human beings?
de Charlus, whose ward Legrandin’s nephew, young Cambremer, had married.
I saw Gilberte coming across the room towards me.
it had merely done its work.
What a task awaited him!
How many great cathedrals remain unfinished!
A pity, perhaps it has your best ideas.
It was high time.
But my memory was old and tired.
At the time this did not worry me.
My high spirits knew neither forethought nor anxiety.
How different was my attitude now!
only momentarily—something whose value was eternal.
But should I have time to exploit them?
Grass must grow and children must die.
No one understood anything of them.
What, in any case, was I hoping to achieve?
Not that I loved death, I abhorred it.
My task was long.
If I worked, it would be only at night.
But for me was there still time?
Was it not too late?
but also: Am I well enough?
Profound Albertine, whom I saw sleeping and who was dead.
V, The Fugitive, pp.
3 Another chronological inconsistency.
4 From Victor Hugo’s Les Contemplations.
5 Quotation from Baudelaire’s Le Balcon.
6 Le moi est haïssable Pascal.
9 The remark occurs later: see preceding note.
Swann’s Way, 0-679-60005-1, $21.
Within a Budding Grove, 0-679-60006-X, $24.
The Guermantes Way, 0-679-60028-0, $24.
Sodom and Gomorrah, 0-679-60029-9, $24.
The Captive & The Fugitive, 0-679-42477-6, $24.
Time Regained & A Guide to Proust, 0-679-42476-8, $24.
Swann’s Way, 0-375-75154-8, $11.
Within a Budding Grove, 0-375-75219-6, $13.
The Guermantes Way, 0-375-75233-1, $13.
Sodom and Gomorrah, 0-375-75310-9, $13.
The Captive & The Fugitive, 0-375-75311-7, $13.
Time Regained & A Guide to Proust, 0-375-75312-5, $13.
or visit www.
E-mail us at modernlibrary@randomhouse.
Small trees had attacked my parents’ house at the foundation.
My father stood, stretching his sore back.
That’s enough, he said, though he was usually a perfectionist.
Even now, I wonder at the steepness of my focus.
Each little tree required its own singular strategy.
Cohen’s Handbook of Federal Indian Law.
Forty-three Gallons of Whiskey.
Where is your mother?
His voice was hoarse and dry.
He gulped it down.
His look persisted until I dropped my eyes.
I had actually just turned thirteen.
Two weeks ago, I’d been twelve.
I said, to break his gaze.
I knew she was not really at work.
She was the head of a department of one.
It was a Sunday—thus the hush.
The Sunday afternoon suspension.
We both knew that.
And so, you see, her absence stopped time.
But at least my father, seeing me unnerved, took charge.
Let’s go find her, he said.
We would go out and find her.
The car’s had a flat, he declared.
These damn roads.
Find her, again.
I strode along beside him.
He was quick and still powerful once he got going.
I was a surprise to my mother, too.
So I am sometimes called Oops to this very day.
Mooshum lived there too, in a timeless fog.
We were all proud of his superlongevity.
Circled the parking lot.
As we came back out the entrance, we turned right.
She went to Hoopdance, I’ll bet, said my father.
Needed something for dinner.
Maybe she was going to surprise us, Joe.
Or a number.
Or called me Bazil.
I’d decided I was Joe when I was six.
He’d passed down several shelves of these antiquities.
A missing mother.
A rare occurrence.
That’s what I wanted, though, something out of the ordinary.
Of course it is!
My father’s chin jutted, his hands tightened on the wheel.
Which was when we passed her.
But here we were!
She’s mad, my father laughed, so relieved.
See, I told you.
Went to the grocery and forgot it was closed.
Mad now she wasted gas.
So it was our turn, then, to worry her.
I could just see her hands knuckled on her hips.
Her smile twitching to jump from behind her frown.
She’d laugh when she heard the story.
We walked up the dirt driveway.
She’d put them out early.
The only flower that could stand a frost.
My father started running.
We’d seen her intent stare and we’d laughed then.
She’s mad at the wasted gas!
I was just behind my father.
She slumped against him, stared past me.
Go down to Clemence, said my father.
Tell them to follow.
Helped her turn over on her side.
I saw her blink, a little frown.
Her face was beginning to swell.
I lifted her head and slid my leg underneath.
I sat with her, holding my arm over her shoulder.
No, I’m coming too.
I’ve got to hold on to her.
We’ll call from the hospital.
But it didn’t even register between us.
Which didn’t matter.
Her blood was on me.
All right, he said.
And then we flew there.
He had the car up past ninety.
We just flew.
His voice did thunder out and fill the Emergency entrance.
Whatever had happened would be fixed.
Because of his fury.
Which was a rare thing and got results.
The doors closed behind them.
I sat down in a chair of orange molded plastic.
Don’t you Indians have your own hospital over there?
Aren’t you building a new one?
The emergency room’s under construction, I told her.
Still, she said.
I made my voice grating and sarcastic.
My mother had taught me different.
The old woman was knitting the thumb of a mitten.
But there was no answer.
Uncle Edward was a science teacher.
She was thumbing through that magazine.
Cher was on the cover.
But Cher did not look tough.
She looked like a surprised plastic doll.
Her ratty yellow hair quivered.
I looked right back, into her lashless hazel eyes.
Then I did something odd by instinct.
I ripped again.
Cher’s identical eyebrows parted.
The lady who was knitting pursed her lips, counting stitches.
Then suddenly I felt bad about Cher.
What had she done to me?
I got up and walked out the door.
I stood outside.
The sun was almost down.
I hopped up and down and swung my arms.
I didn’t care what.
Which I knew were impossible.
It just could not happen.
So that left the other word.
She also asked me what had happened, what was wrong.
Mom’s bleeding, I said.
My throat shut and I couldn’t say more.
Was there an accident?
The nurse disapproved that my mother had asked for me.
Insisted, she said.
A sheet was tucked around her legs.
There was no blood, anywhere.
At first I didn’t look at him, just at her.
My mother was a beautiful woman—that’s something I always knew.
A given among family, among strangers.
Slim even after their children.
Calm and direct, with take-charge eyes and movie-star lips.
Even then, they were beautiful.
I asked stupidly.
She didn’t answer.
Tears leaked from the corners of her eyes.
She blotted them away with a gauze-wrapped fist.
I’m all right, Joe.
Look at me.
And I looked at her.
But she was not all right.
There were scrapes of blows and the awful lopsidedness.
Her skin had lost its normal warm color.
It was gray as ash.
Her lips were seamed with dried blood.
Laid another blanket over her.
I hung my head and leaned toward her.
She went rigid and closed her eyes.
This action devastated me.
She’s not all right, I said.
She’s not all right.
I spoke as if to tell him an urgent truth.
And for a moment I thought he’d break.
He was looking strangely at his watch again.
Joe, he said.
Your mother was attacked.
I said the first thing I thought of.
Attacked by who?
We looked at each other and he said nothing.
Even a little clumsy and soft.
Almost a whisper.
She doesn’t know who the man was, Joe.
But will we find him?
I asked in that same hushed voice.
We will find him, my father said.
And then what?
I can’t think that far ahead right now.
His leveling brown eyes.
My father saw this.
His fingers bit into my shoulders.
We’ll get him, I said quickly.
I was fearful as I said this, dizzy.
He took his hands away.
Yes, he said again.
He tapped his watch, bit down on his lip.
Now if the police would come.
They need to get a statement.
They should have been here.
We turned to go back to the room.
Exactly, he said.
But they would inevitably change the way we sought justice.
I stood against the wall.
Each shook my father’s hand and swiftly exited.
A young doctor named Egge was on duty that day.
He was the one who had examined my mother.
Egge had returned.
I don’t suggest that the boy .
, he began.
She needs him to see that she is all right.
Egge was silent.
He gave my father a prim little piercing look.
I’d like to see Mom again.
I’ll come get you, said my father urgently.
Egge was staring even harder at my father.
I turned away from them with sick reluctance.
As my father and Dr.
Egge walked away from me, they spoke in low voices.
They stopped outside my mother’s room.
Egge turned and saw me frozen at the doors.
He pointed toward the waiting room.
Egge the details and extent of my mother’s injuries.
She held my hand.
You can go to school tomorrow from our house.
I’ll come back here and wait.
Nothing would go on as normal.
You could at least sleep, said Aunt Clemence.
It wouldn’t hurt to sleep.
Was it rape?
I asked her.
Yes, she said.
There was something else, I said.
My family doesn’t hedge about things.
Rape is forced sex.
A man can force a woman to have sex.
That’s what happened.
But I wanted to know something else.
Will she die from it?
No, said Clemence immediately.
She won’t die.
—it’s more complicated, she said finally.
You saw that she was hurt, real bad?
Yes, I saw.
It was a relief.
It can be more violent than other times.
Violently raped, I thought.
I knew those words fit together.
Gasoline, I said.
I smelled it.
Why did she smell like gas?
Did she go to Whitey’s?
I’m okay, she said through the Kleenex.
Her voice sounded normal, even detached.
Don’t worry, Joe.
I thought I was going to faint, but I’m not.
Gathering herself, she sat up.
She patted my hand.
I didn’t ask her about the gasoline again.
I peeled myself unpleasantly up on one elbow.
Egge was across the room talking to Clemence.
I had three friends.
I still keep up with two of them.
The other is a white cross on the Montana Hi-Line.
His physical departure is marked there, I mean.
Virgil Lafournais was his name, or Cappy.
A thunderbird egg, he called it.
She was anxious to get out, relieved to be home.
Cappy and your other friends will miss you, she said.
She had always liked to feed us.
My other two friends were Zack Peace and Angus Kashpaw.
Doe was still chairman, on again, off again.
When it got bad enough, Doe would decline to run.
Inevitably, his successor went through the same treatment.
His father, Corwin Peace, was a musician on perpetual tour.
His mother, Carleen Thunder, ran the tribal newspaper.
He said he knew one thousand songs.
Aunt Star managed an epic amount of craziness.
The windows soon fell apart, lost their screens.
The plumbing kept backing up.
Not the old one, but The Next Generation.
Naturally, we all wanted to be Worf.
We all wanted to be Klingons.
Worf’s solution to any problem was to attack.
We pretended we had special knowledge.
I pretended I believed him.
I would not have let him anyway.
My mother didn’t want anyone to see her.
She got in her car and swerved away.
I had never felt that before.
But the back door was really locked.
And the front door locked automatically—Clemence had probably forgotten that.
That he can make his own sandwich.
The air seemed hollow in the house, stale, strangely flat.
I eased back down the stairs into the kitchen.
It was grossly sour.
The living room was divided off by low shelves.
Everything had stopped.
Even the clock’s ticking.
I want a new clock, he’d said.
Burst into my parents’ bedroom.
Joe, she said, trembling.
the milk was sour.
She lowered her arm and sat up.
She took the freshness of its contents seriously.
She’d bought Tupperware even, at a party.
The milk was sour?
Yes, I said.
We have to go to the grocery!
A sick green pulsed around her temples.
Her jaw was indigo.
Her fingers plucked at the quilt’s edge.
They have milk now at Whitey’s gas station.
I can bike down there, Mom.
I brought her purse.
She gave me a five-dollar bill.
Get other things, she said.
Food you like.
Our house was built in the 1940s, a sturdy bungalow-style.
She had recently bought a large dairy cooler.
I took my bicycle and a backpack.
But no, she was inside counting Slim Jims.
She had a great big flashy radiant white smile.
It was like a sunlamp.
Still, I’d hit a lull in our family’s reproductive history.
It was all on me—the bad and the good.
She carried them high in her pastel scoop-neck T-shirts.
Humans were meant to live with the horse.
Tears flooded her eyes.
Shit, she said.
Let me at the guy.
I’ll waste him.
I did not know what to say.
Sonja’s breasts made most thoughts leave my head.
How’s your mom doing?
she said, shaking her head, swiping at her cheeks.
Not good, I said.
We’ll bring Pearl.
My mother was in the bedroom, not hungry.
My father put down his fork.
Joe, we need a protection dog.
There is a man we suspect.
But he has cleared out.
Which means he could be anywhere.
I asked what I thought was a police TV question.
My father considered not answering, I could tell.
But he finally did.
He had trouble saying some of the words.
The perpetrator or the suspect .
the attacker .
dropped a book of matches.
The matches were from the golf course.
They give them out at the desk.
So they’re starting with the golfers, I said.
This meant the attacker could be Indian or white.
That golf course fascinated everyone—it was a kind of fad.
With a special introductory rate.
Yes, the golf course.
Why’d he drop the matches?
A book match?
Did he get it lit?
the match was wet.
So then what happened?
My father picked his fork back up.
All right, Joe, you’re asking a lot of questions.
You are developing an order to things in your mind.
You’re thinking this out.
So am I.
Joe, the perpetrator couldn’t light the match.
He went to look for another book of matches.
Some way of lighting a fire.
While he was gone, your mother managed to escape.
There was no amusement in it.
A smile of remembrance of lost times.
Oh no, she says, not again!
Yeah, Dad, she calls you.
Mild swear word.
Where’d you get that?
Damn, I don’t know.
I never really minded, he said.
We don’t go many places.
Our schedule is pretty boring.
That’s never happened.
But see, you might have been outside.
Not heard the telephone.
I thought, What if she really gets stuck somewhere?
I saw someone else had a key holder like it.
That’s how she escaped.
He came at her.
I took a deep breath.
I went back to the dog.
Pearl bites, I said.
Good, said my father.
He’s still after her then.
We don’t know, said my father.
Anybody could have picked up those matches.
Anybody could have dropped them.
But probably it was someone from around here.
You can’t tell from a name.
You can’t even tell from a local police report.
You can’t tell from a picture.
From a mug shot.
From a phone number.
government, someone identified as a member of a tribe.
But that tribe has also got to be federally recognized.
She was still on pain pills, but Dr.
Egge had told her that bed rest wouldn’t help.
She needed mild activity.
But he could not manage dessert.
Thus, the pie.
Bunny piss, he griped.
That’s right, Daddy, said Clemence.
It’s an old man’s drink.
It’s good for you.
Ah, swamp tea, said Uncle Whitey, swirling the glass appreciatively.
Good for everything that ails you, Daddy.
Cures old age?
Takes the years off?
This goes down hard, my daughter, he said to Clemence.
Cleans out your liver good, though, said Whitey.
Here, Clemence, pour a little swamp tea for Joe.
Maybe the pervert really is an Indian, said Uncle Whitey.
He was carrying an Indian suitcase.
What Indian suitcase?
The plastic garbage bags.
I leaned forward.
So he left?
But from where?
Who is he?
What’s his name?
Clemence came back in and flared her eyes at him.
Awee, said Uncle Whitey.
Guess I’m not supposed to talk.
Or have even a little glass of whiskey.
A man’s kidneys overflow, said Mooshum.
You piss in the sink?
When given tea, always.
She poured the third half full and tossed it back.
I was astounded.
What was that?
Uncle Whitey asked.
That was my daughter pushed too far, said Mooshum.
I pity Edward when he returns.
The whiskey will have set by then.
What kind of tricks, said Mooshum.
Old Indian tricks.
Teach them to Edward, eh?
He is losing ground.
The golf course.
Is that where it happened?
No, it didn’t happen there.
Where did it?
Whitey raised his sad and permanently bloodshot eyes.
He wasn’t going to tell me.
I couldn’t hold his gaze.
He lifted the shot and took a neat sip.
His eyes shone.
He had not taken in our exchange.
His brain was still fixed on women.
Paint the picture.
What does she do at present?
Whitey shifted his eyes off me.
Tattered scarves flowed from her hips.
She is always adding numbers.
She cleans the glass every week.
Sonja stretched up on her tiptoes.
I heard her set the pies out to cool.
She’s coming out of her room tonight, I told Whitey.
I’m supposed to take a pie home.
My dad is cooking.
That’s good, he said.
Hear me now, Oops.
She gotta come out.
Don’t leave her to sit.
Don’t let her alone too much.
Clear spring shadows spread like water across the road.
Doe had a quiet face, a crooked nose, kind eyes.
The place was layers of junk on interesting junk now.
The evening wasn’t cooling off, but I didn’t care.
I’d sweat to eat that pie.
My father let me in.
The hot kitchen smelled of some violent experiment.
Let’s keep this as a surprise.
The pièce de résistance.
She’ll be down in a minute, Joe.
I stayed in there, washing and drying my hands slowly.
I didn’t really want to see my mother.
It was terrible, but it was true.
The fan was on, stirring her dress.
I busied myself.
My father had made a stew.
The concoction gave off a penetrating reek.
My father beckoned the two of us to sit down.
He ceremoniously heaped our shallow bowls.
Then we sat looking at the food.
We didn’t pray.
I couldn’t just start eating.
My mother took a sharp breath, and frowned.
To not feel things.
Not refer to what had happened.
His emotion grabbed at her.
She choked her first gulp down.
I sat poised.
We both looked at my father.
I added caraway seeds, he said gently.
What do you think?
What do you think?
my father asked once more.
He swallowed once, twice.
I was aghast at his strength of mind.
I filled up on bread.
His spoon slowed.
I got to finish my mother’s.
She started teasing my father about the stew.
Exactly how old were those turnips?
Older than Joe.
And where did you get that onion?
That’s my little secret.
And the meat, roadkill?
Oh god, no.
It died in the backyard.
We were the fire keepers.
Cappy had already made the fire.
The rocks, the grandfathers, were superheating in the middle.
I couldn’t stop laughing.
Randall threw up his hands and walked off.
Food was our pay, besides sometimes driving Randall’s beat-up Olds.
It was usually a pleasant enough job.
That night, however, instead of cooling off, it grew muggy.
There was no breeze.
Even before sunset, whining clouds of mosquitoes swarmed us.
Two of them were baked, but Randall didn’t notice.
It drove Cappy nuts.
I swiped them off.
Thanks, he said distractedly.
I’m gonna pray for your family.
That’s cool, I said, though it made me uncomfortable.
I didn’t like being prayed for.
Cappy saw my look.
Don’t worry about it, Joe.
He prays for me too.
And he gets a lot of girls with his medicine.
So he’s gotta keep in practice.
Girls, especially white ones, were fascinated with him.
They all went in.
They started singing and we sprayed ourselves again with Off.
They raged and flailed in the tarps.
There was muffled howling.
The mosquitoes dive-bombed.
We ran down with the water cooler.
Suzette and Josey just stayed in the car.
A long, long prayer, Birkenstock.
Then you ladled on that water .
Oooh, said Randall.
My friend said it was Pueblo medicine.
I was praying for his situation with a Navajo woman.
Cappy, go and get that jar.
Don’t order me.
Cappy went out.
He came back.
There was a label on the jar.
Randall held the jar and frowned.
He sniffed it like a fancy wine taster.
Tears spurted instantly.
He stuck his tongue out.
Hot pepper, said the others.
Special Pueblo hot pepper.
They watched Randall dance around the room.
Man, look at his feet fly.
We should give him Pueblo medicine next powwow.
For sure, man.
They took long drinks of water.
It burnt like hell.
How could Randall have done that to us, man?
We looked out.
They’d left behind two bags of fresh frybread.
The grease was darkening the paper sacks in delicate patches.
Cappy looked at me.
His eyes were swollen red.
This was one of those close familial Randall times.
His friends were already laughing and eating.
Joe, he said, I saw something in there.
I filled my mouth with taco meat.
He was surrounded by a silver glow.
We sat there quietly.
I stopped eating.
What should I do about it, Randall?
I asked in a low voice.
We’ll both put down tobacco, he said.
And maybe you should talk to Mooshum.
It had a bad feeling, Joe.
attorney, Gabir Olson, an old friend.
Usually a raft of bigger cases.
My father wanted to make sure that didn’t happen.
So the days went by in that false interlude.
I was proud of that.
Next door, in his closet-turned-chambers, I did a sweep-out.
Constitution, plus the Bill of Rights.
Every judge needs a scout out there.
She knew who could be released on recognizance, who’d run.
She was invaluable, though her filing system was opaque.
We’re taking them home, said my father.
This was a thing he did not do.
But today, we loaded the files into the backseat.
We put my bike in the trunk and drove home.
My father entered before me.
Walking through the kitchen door, I heard a splintering crash.
And then a keen, low, anguished cry.
His footsteps, too, were heavy.
But maybe he’d forgotten.
Maybe he’d been too quiet this time.
They’d stand there together in a little tableau of homecoming.
We were not churchgoers.
This was our ritual.
Our breaking bread, our communion.
She would have been jolted from her shock.
I wanted her to shout, cry out, throw something.
She was wearing a plain blue dress that night.
A pair of black Minnetonka moccasins.
Her steps were soundless.
She seemed to float.
We stood together even after the bedroom door clicked shut.
Together we brought the mess outside to the garbage.
My father paused after he closed the bin.
When he remained there motionless, I truly became frightened.
I put my hand urgently on his arm.
Help me get those files in.
His voice was hard and urgent.
We’ll start tonight.
And so I did.
We unloaded the car.
Then we slapped together a few rough sandwiches.
We brushed our crumbs to the floor.
My father turned on the lamps.
He’s there, he said, nodding at the heavy stacks.
I understood that I was going to help.
My father was treating me as his assistant.
He knew, of course, about my surreptitious reading.
I glanced instinctively at the Cohen shelf.
We began to read.
My father brought her food.
She would not let me read anything inspirational.
She ate little.
We read with a concentrated intensity.
Durlin Peace said that the washers belonged to him.
What about them?
said my father.
I looked back down at the file.
Here it was.
For what had Felix S.
Cohen written his Handbook?
Where was the greatness?
Tommy Thomas et al.
Vinland Super Mart et al.
My father had kept this one aside.
It seems like an ordinary enough case, I said.
I tried to keep the disappointment out of my voice.
The case held up on appeal.
There was some pride in his voice.
I looked back at the file.
Tommy Thomas et al.
or the Larks?
The Larks, though Grace and George are dead.
The Larks, in fact, were shrill opponents of abortion.
Which brings us to the other case.
and Linda Wishkob, who was born Linda Lark.
Strange, I said.
It gets stranger, said my father.
How can it?
Everybody goes to Whitey’s now.
Whitey and Sonja have put the Larks out of business.
During this time, Mrs.
She died of a sudden aneurysm.
I saw him in the courtroom.
People say he’s quite a talker, a real charmer.
But he didn’t say a word during the trial.
Could he be the .
Attacker, I don’t know.
He’s troubling for sure.
He wrote a crank letter to the Fargo Forum.
Opichi clipped it.
Lark lives in his mother’s house, last I heard.
He lives very quietly and goes away a lot.
Down to South Dakota, it’s supposed.
He’s become secretive.
Other people absorbed her anger.
She was a frail-looking little old white lady.
But her sense of entitlement was compelling.
She was venomous.
Maybe Lark moved on, or maybe he absorbed her poison.
I stared at the files.
I’ve learned since that there are two things about judges.
This responsibility was carried out.
He was not responsible for the actions of the drinkers.
The court ruled in favor of the defendants.
Why this one?
I asked, when my father returned.
It was late.
Because of the round house, he said.
The old round house?
Did it happen there?
He did not answer.
What happened to Mom, did it happen there?
Again, no answer.
He shuffled away the papers, stood up.
He looked a thousand years old.
Melting brown eye.
Still, only first gear worked.
And the hand brakes gave out unexpectedly.
It was the round house.
I slipped downstairs and let Pearl out.
Together, we peed outside, in the back bushes.
I didn’t want to flush the noisy inside toilet.
Guard Mom, I said.
It was a lofty June morning.
Hot and clear.
There would be ticks.
Hardly anyone was out this early.
Only two cars passed me on the highway.
There were houses by the lake, screened by bush.
I guessed that was the work of the police.
The area had leafed in thickly during the past weeks.
A neatened area.
Something that did not look or feel right.
An empty jar, a bottle cap, a blackened match.
I dropped my bike.
There was a moment of intense quiet.
I started with emotion.
The grieving cry seemed emitted by the structure itself.
The sound filled me and flooded me.
Finally, it ceased.
I decided to go forward.
The place seemed peaceful.
There was no door.
I stood in the doorway.
The floor was tidy—no empties or papers or blankets.
All had been picked up by the police.
I caught the faint odor of gasoline.
Why that part of the Bible?
I’d once asked Mooshum.
Chapter 1, verse 4, he said.
We think that way too.
Father Damien had sent home the superintendent.
Then the water drums and feathers and pipes had returned.
The old priest had learned the songs.
No priest knew those songs now.
But I didn’t know the exact whereness of it.
At that moment, a certainty entered.
He had attacked her here.
I let them flood down my cheeks.
Yes, tears can be thoughts, why not?
Nobody would come up the road that way, anyway.
The attack had happened approximately where I was standing.
I lifted the top line and side-legged through.
He’d gone back for more matches when his got wet.
Probably, he was a smoker.
He’d left behind extra matches or a lighter.
He followed that fence down to the lake.
He’d reached his stash.
Heard the car door slam.
But too late.
She’d managed to start the engine, stomp on the accelerator.
She was gone.
He ran forward, then back.
And the can.
He could not be caught with the can.
I was glad when they came.
When I got upset like that, sometimes I puked.
Maybe I was numbed.
I sat there, weak.
I couldn’t let them see me shaking like a girl.
They were the best cigarettes you could steal.
For this occasion, he’d taken two.
Zack and Angus shared the other.
I dragged on the end until it scorched my fingers.
There was a long, crooked spout.
I wanna get him, I said to my friends.
Watch him burn.
They were also staring at the can.
They knew what it was about.
Zack chewed a piece of grass.
I looked at Angus.
He was always hungry.
Next we tucked in my mother’s famous little crunchy pickles.
Last, we closed the sandwiches back up.
Here’s how it went, I said without blinking.
He did it here.
I tipped my head back to the round house.
But his matches got wet.
I told them exactly how my mother had escaped.
He had to have left something in the woods.
He could have smoked, dropped a butt.
We all nodded.
Looked at the ground.
Cappy raised his head, stared at me evenly.
Make it so, he said.
What we got was wood ticks.
Our reservation is notorious for them.
But they swarm slow.
We were crawling through tick hole after tick hole.
Zack yelled once, panic in his voice.
Shut up, you baby!
Fleas are a hell of a lot worse.
Yeah, fleas, said Zack.
It was lucky they didn’t suck me dry.
They sucked your brain dry, said Zack.
Look what you threw at me.
It had obviously been there through the winter.
Older kids made fires on the beach.
There were countless cigarette butts.
The bread bag quickly filled with condoms and butts.
People are disgusting, said Zack.
This is way too much evidence.
I knelt on the ground with the bread bag.
Ticks were crawling all over me.
Hey, Zack, I need some help!
Oh, fuck you, said Zack.
They’ll call you Three Balls.
Like Old Man Niswi, I said.
He really had three.
My grandma knows, said Zack.
Shut up, said Cappy.
I went underwater and stayed as long as I could.
When I came up, Zack was talking.
Your grandma says all kinds of things, said Cappy.
She told me all about it, Zack said.
Zack had one of those last sort.
Grandma Ignatia Thunder.
She spoke Indian and talked about men’s secrets.
Size matters not.
Judge me by my size, do you?
Zack had a Darth Vader, circumcised, and I did too.
We made a fire.
Worf’s an Emperor, said Angus.
For sure, said Cappy.
Nah, I said.
And he would definitely be a Darth Vader.
I don’t see him as anything but a Darth.
But hey, said Zack, a Klingon?
Do you question Klingon power?
said Cappy, standing up.
He looked down.
Rise, my friend.
We started laughing at him.
Cappy laughed too.
Angus went off to take a piss.
Holeee, he yelled.
One in each hand.
Cappy and Zack whooped with joy.
I ran toward him.
Drop that, I yelled.
He laid the six-packs carefully on the ground.
I think he left those, I said.
I think it’s evidence.
There will be fingerprints.
He talked fast, too.
Does water erase fingerprints?
I found these in an open cooler.
The beer was covered with water.
You found his stash, I said.
Can I pick up the beer?
I guess, I said.
Can I crack one open?
I looked at my friends.
Yeah, I said.
Make of that what you will.
I took a beer.
The can was wet and icy.
The cooler, cheap Styrofoam, sat against a tree.
There was a heap of clothes to one side.
We drank our beers.
Went down good, said Angus.
He attempted to crush his can against his thigh.
Ow, he said.
No boogid wars, said Zack.
Aw, said Angus, cracking another fart.
Why did the Indian ignore the cow pie?
Nobody said anything.
He didn’t know shit!
Ha-ha, said Zack.
You’re gonna turn into a powwow MC like your dad.
How much is four bucks and four bucks?
An Indian bar fight, groan, said Angus.
He lifted his leg but he had no gas left.
As we crawled along, I noticed us.
My skin was very light brown.
Cappy’s was more brown.
Zack’s a deeper brown.
Angus’s was white but already tanned.
Don’t encourage him, I said.
They got tick-led.
Angus was crawling away from me.
I kept my distance.
The blankets were made of crummy polyester.
There was a rotted-looking shirt, a pair of jeans.
It all stank like behind the Dead Custer Bar.
Maybe we should leave this to the police, I said.
I’ll be in deep shit.
Also, said Angus, there’s the beer.
Drinking half the evidence doesn’t look good, said Cappy.
Let’s get rid of it all, said Zack.
Okay, I said.
He could have died, they said.
We put our clothes on and felt normal again.
Angus asked Zack.
Don’t start that again, said Cappy.
I mean, they missed the gas can.
They missed the cooler.
They missed the pile of clothes.
That pile stinks.
It smells like piss.
He pissed himself, said Angus.
We should torch that stuff, I said.
Suddenly, we froze.
Cappy stood up and stared at the round house.
Angus made the sign of the cross.
Let’s bug out, said Zack.
That was our concern.
Zack’s mom would be at bingo.
Doe’s bachelor stews were a crapshoot, though.
Once he added commodity prunes to his chili.
Nobody could find the middle.
Sonja was mine.
Our other prospect was Grandma Thunder.
She’ll make frybread and meat, said Zack.
She always has canned peaches, said Angus.
His voice was reverent.
She has her price, said Cappy.
Who would say that word around their grandma?
It could come out by mistake.
Don’t say come.
Don’t even mention cats.
She’ll say pussy.
Okay, I said.
Don’t say head, ever.
She will take it wrong, believe me.
Don’t say horny, don’t say hard.
Don’t say hot or tit or virgin.
I have to get off my bike, said Angus.
We all did.
We put our bikes down.
I asked, even though I knew, where Mom was.
I love you, Dad.
But he had hung up.
The words I love you echoed.
A red cloud of anger floated up over my eyes.
My head was light with hunger, too.
Shut the fuck up, I said.
He put his hands up and walked away.
I followed him down the hall.
He turned around.
He said I didn’t need new shoes, which was true.
Cappy had the shoes I wanted.
You got the shoes I wanted.
No, I said, you got the shoes I wanted.
Okay, he said, let’s trade.
We traded shoes.
He walked away from me on pinched feet.
He had heard what I’d said on the phone.
The smell had a wonderful power and my stomach jumped.
I ate one.
I ate another jam and white bread sandwich.
Wiisinig, she said, without turning around.
I looked at Cappy.
Then we each took a plate and stood beside her.
We said thank you.
She salted and peppered the meat.
We kept standing there, our plates out.
On the table, there was a block of commodity cheese.
For a long time, nobody said anything.
We just ate and ate.
Grandma hummed as she cooked at the stove.
Cappy’s two aunts tanned hides in their backyards.
Their backyards stank, but the hides came out perfectly.
Every summer they gave a soft buckskin to Grandma.
Her moccasins were beaded with small pink flowers.
This seemed odd for someone who cooked for boys.
As we filled up, we ate more slowly.
Bijiu came in without knocking.
The worst of them all!
Eyah, they ate good, said Grandma Thunder.
Top shelf, said Angus.
We must go now, Kookum, said Zack.
Apijigo miigwech, said Cappy.
Minopogoziwag ingiw zaasakok waanag.
Just listen to that Anishinaabe!
They were indeed pleased with him.
Just go .
This one, this one here, said Mrs.
Bijiu, lip pointing at me suddenly, fiercely.
He is bony!
Our hearts sank at the word.
Grandma Thunder’s voice cracked.
She reared up in her chair.
I know who you’re talking about.
He’s in good shape, though, never drank.
Worked hard all his life.
Now gets himself laid by a different woman every night!
You boys listen up, said Grandma Ignatia.
You want to learn something?
Go and go?
Live clean like old Napoleon.
Liquor makes you quicker and that’s no good.
Bread and lard keep you hard!
He was faithful to his wife!
In addition, he swears by his secret formula.
Our heads turned back.
Look at them swivel necks, the two old ladies laughed.
Should we give them Napoleon’s secret formula?
But Angus heard it.
Joe needs a medical opinion.
I took off Cappy’s shoes.
Thanks, I said.
We switched back.
She stood alert, gazing at me, and never barked.
You knew it was me, I said.
You did good.
She sniffed at my hand.
I scratched her ears until she shook my hand away.
She was hungry.
Inside, I heard voices.
I put away my bike and slipped inside.
I sneaked in and stopped outside the study.
It would be the Seagrams V.
from the bottle behind the dishes on the highest shelf.
I craned to hear what they would say.
This of course both repelled and fascinated me.
I held my breath.
She is isolating herself even from Joe.
Doesn’t talk to anyone from work, of course.
Clemence says she is cutting her off, too.
She dropped a casserole, then this.
Well, I know that wasn’t it.
I frightened her, triggered her terror of the event.
But I cannot refer to it.
There was silence.
At last my father said, the attack.
I must be going crazy, too, Edward.
I keep losing track of Joe.
He’ll be all right.
She’ll come out of it, said Edward.
I don’t know.
She’s drifting out of grasp.
What about church?
Would it help if Clemence took her to church?
She never said why.
What about this new priest, though, my father asked.
Good-looking, I suppose.
If you like the type.
Man on a doomed mission.
Of all things, he’s an ex-Marine.
Oh god, a trained killer turned Catholic.
My father rose.
I heard him shuffle about.
I heard the silken pour of liquor.
Edward, what do we know of this priest?
Pour me another.
He’s from Texas.
The Catholic martyr on our kitchen wall.
That’s where this priest is from.
I don’t know Dallas.
That’s odd for a Benedictine.
They strike me as a more genteel and thoughtful bunch.
True, generally, but he’s new, recently ordained.
He’s different from—but oh, who remembers Father Damien?
And, ah, he’s searching.
He gives very questioning sermons, Bazil.
Remember how we laughed about it?
If only it were about God.
What do you see then?
Just an air rifle, surely.
Just an air rifle, yes.
But he was fast with it, deadly, and accurate.
Dozen or so.
All laid out on the playground.
But the round house.
Symbol of the old pagan ways.
The Metis women.
My father’s voice caught.
Now Bazil, now Bazil, said Edward.
This is just talk.
But I thought the priest’s guilt sounded plausible.
All we needed was proof.
I must have fallen asleep for a good hour.
He spoke to her in a calming way.
He didn’t sound drunk at all.
I heard him pour food into Pearl’s dish.
Then her businesslike crunching and gnashing.
He turned off the light.
He paused there, and then went past.
To the bathroom, I expected.
None of us had ever slept in it.
They never sought protection from each other’s illnesses.
The sewing room door shut.
Hoped he had been looking for something.
But then the bed creaked.
There was silence.
He’d forgotten all about me.
I lay in my bed, sleepless, outraged.
Over and over, I replayed the day’s events.
The day had been packed with treacherous findings and information.
I went through it all over again.
I wanted to hear my mother laugh until she snorted.
How I could have offered to do that errand.
Something nagged at me.
The file itself.
No one had mentioned it.
Why had she gone back for a file?
What was in it?
I was back to weak regret.
But I would ask her.
There was, now I remembered it, a phone call.
Then she’d left, mentioning the file.
Eventually my brain slowed, sifting thoughts into images.
Her claws clicked on the bare wooden floor.
I turned toward the window and opened my eyes.
I pictured a raccoon or a skunk.
Kneeling next to Pearl, I could make out the figure.
Yet it was neither human nor entirely inhuman.
The being saw me and my heart jumped.
I could see that face close up.
There was a glow behind its head.
The hands drew back and the branches closed over it.
The thing was gone.
I was up before him.
After I began to work at the gas station.
He hadn’t started on his coffee yet.
Soon he would be brought to life.
He laid a hand briefly on my shoulder.
I shrugged it off.
Where do you think I slept last night?
On the couch, he said, surprised.
You were snoring your fool head off.
I covered you up with a blanket.
Oh, I said.
It looked almost like a real person.
Yes, they’re out there, my father answered.
I glared at his back.
And had he really covered me with a blanket?
I had not noticed the blanket.
When he came back into the room, I spoke belligerently.
I said ghost.
What do you mean they’re out there?
He poured more coffee.
Sat down across from me.
As usual, he refused to be perturbed by my anger.
Joe, he said.
I worked in a graveyard.
There was an occasional ghost, that’s what.
Ghosts were there.
Sometimes they walked in, looking just like people.
My old boss taught me how to pick them out.
Then they’d stand there, confused maybe.
I never approached them.
But how did you know they were ghosts?
Oh, you just know.
Couldn’t you tell the thing you saw was a ghost?
I said yes.
I was still mad.
That’s just great, I said.
Now we have ghosts.
So why was it there?
My father hesitated.
Because of your mother, possibly.
They are attracted to disturbances of all kinds.
A person dropping back through time, I guess, by mistake.
I’ve heard that from my own mother.
His mother, my grandmother, was from a medicine family.
She would have said to watch for that ghost.
It could be trying to tell you something.
My throat went dry and I couldn’t swallow.
I sat there.
He sat there.
He’d put out tobacco.
I would put out tobacco.
It would leave a black ring in the cup.
I was sick of bringing down her wasted food.
He closed his eyes.
I’d snap, I thought, if I looked down.
So I said, Hey, Dad, it’s just a ghost.
We can get rid of it.
I know, he said.
She’s going to get better, to get over this.
She’ll start working again next week.
She said something about it.
Clemence brought some light reading into the house.
But that’s good, isn’t it?
How do you mean we’ll get rid of it?
Father Travis, I said.
He can bless the yard or something.
I could see an energy fill him now.
He was something like his old self.
He knew when he was hearing bullshit.
So you were awake, he said.
You heard us.
Yes, and I know more, I said.
I went to the round house.
Then she will come downstairs.
She loves the scent of the lilacs.
My mother missed its glory.
She missed those too.
We found the spindly stalks dried to crisps.
Not that she noticed.
We were going to put in my mother’s garden.
There were red, purple, pink, and striped petunias.
Yellow and orange marigolds.
Dad gave me directions.
The bits and pieces of confusion.
The round house.
I was beginning to dread the talk with my father.
The files again.
Behind the house her vegetable garden lay—still heaped with straw.
Keep those out.
We worked together for another hour.
He left to buy the rest of the plants.
I went inside.
I was supposed to watch over my mother.
I looked around the kitchen.
I ate a handful.
There was no answer.
I knocked harder.
Come in, said my mother.
I went in.
She kept the shades pulled.
I wanted to set the sandwich down and run.
But she asked me to sit.
If she’d eaten anything I’d not seen it.
I assumed that she wanted me to read to her.
Clemence or my father chose the books—nothing sad or upsetting.
Or those Favorite Poems.
Dad had checked Invictus, and High Flight, which I’d read.
They made my mother emit a dry laugh.
Before I could touch the switch, she gripped my arm.
She’d become weightless, all jutting bones.
Her fingers bit hard into my arms.
Her voice was fuzzy, as if she’d just woken.
I heard you two.
What were you doing out there?
Digging what, a grave?
Your father used to dig graves.
I shook her arm off and drew back from her.
I sat down in the chair.
No, Mom, not graves.
I spoke carefully.
We were digging up the dirt in your vegetable garden.
Before that, I was planting flowers.
Flowers for you to look at, Mom.
She turned over, away from me.
Her arms had wasted to sticks.
I made you a sandwich, I said.
Thank you, dear, she whispered.
Do you want me to read to you?
No, that’s all right.
Mom, I need to talk to you.
I need to talk to you, I said again.
You’re always tired, but you sleep all the time.
She didn’t answer.
It was just a comment, I said.
Her silence got to me.
Can’t you eat?
You’d feel better.
Can’t you get up?
Can’t you .
come back to life?
I can’t do it.
I don’t know why.
I just cannot do it.
Are you cold?
I stood and drew the blanket up over her shoulders.
Then I sat back down in the chair.
I planted those stripey petunias you like.
Mom, I planted all different kinds of flowers.
I planted sweet peas.
I hadn’t really planted sweet peas.
I don’t know why I said it.
Sweet peas, I said again.
I hadn’t planted sunflowers either.
Sunflowers will get huge!
She turned over in bed and stared at me.
Her eyes were sunk in gray circles of skin.
Mom, I’ve got to talk to you.
About the sunflowers?
Joe, they’ll shade out the other flowers.
Maybe I should plant them in another place, I said.
I’ve got to talk to you.
Her face dulled.
Mom, did they ask you about that file?
There was no file, Joe.
Yes, there was.
You told me you went to get a file.
Where is it?
The dread in her face became an active fear.
I didn’t tell you.
You imagined that, Joe.
Her lips trembled.
Don’t you want us to catch him?
She opened her eyes.
Her eyes were black pits.
She did not answer.
I’m going to kill him for you.
She sat up suddenly, activated, like rising from the dead.
Listen, Joe, you’ve got to promise me.
Don’t go after him.
Don’t do anything.
Yes, I’m going to, Mom.
I kept goading her.
I’ll do it.
There is nothing to stop me.
I know who he is and I’m going after him.
You can’t stop me because you’re here in bed.
You can’t get out.
You’re trapped in here.
And it stinks.
Do you know it stinks in here?
Stop that, Joe.
I turned away from the window.
She was sitting up.
There was no blood in her face at all.
Her skin had a pasty, sunless quality.
Now you listen to me, Joe.
You will not badger me or harass me.
I have to heal any way I can.
You will not go after him.
You will not terrify me, Joe.
I’ve had enough fear for my whole life.
You will not add to my fear.
You will not add to my sorrows.
You will not be part of this.
I stood before her, small again.
All of this.
She swept her arm toward the door.
It is all a violation.
Find him, don’t find him.
Who is he?
You have no idea.
You don’t know.
And you never will.
Just let me sleep.
All right, I said, and left the room.
As I descended the stairs my heart grew cold.
For sure, she was hiding something.
My ribs hurt.
I couldn’t get my breath.
I took great gulps of sunshine.
But Pearl came up to me.
I felt my anger blazing out.
I’m going to teach you to play fetch, I said.
Pearl trotted across the yard with me.
I whirled around.
Drop it, I said.
Her wolf ears went back.
I was mad.
All right, I said.
So that’s your game.
Brandished it to throw.
I dropped the stick.
I tried once more.
I slowly released the stick.
The dirt was moist deep down below the surface.
I began to like what I was doing.
The ground drained my rage.
The gesture made me mad all over again.
You can smoke that if you want to, I said.
I’m not gonna start.
I’m not gonna be like you.
I’ll wait until later, he said.
We have not finished talking, have we.
Let’s put the lawn chairs out.
Dad brought out a carton of lemonade and two glasses.
We sat down with our lemonade.
The round house.
My father stared down at it.
About fifteen feet out, in the lake.
In the lake .
He’d sunk it in the lake.
He put his hand on his chair’s aluminum armrest.
But it just .
I could never do you harm.
In fact, it might set your mind against me.
It might cause you to do things secretly.
I am going to have to ask you to stop.
No more hunting down the attacker.
No more clue gathering.
But I was wrong to draw you in.
You’re too damn inquisitive, Joe.
You’ve surprised the hell out of me.
You could get yourself .
if anything happened to you .
Nothing’s going to happen to me!
I had expected my father to be proud.
To give me one of his low whistles of surprise.
How to set the trap.
How to catch the priest.
Instead, I was getting a lecture.
Heart to heart, Joe.
Listen, this is a sadist.
Beyond the limits, someone who has no .
way beyond .
Way beyond your jurisdiction, I said.
There was an edge of juvenile sarcasm in my voice.
I am asking you now as your father to quit.
It is a police matter, do you understand?
What do they care?
Look, Joe, you know Soren Bjerke.
Yes, I said.
What did I say?
he asked warily.
Did I really?
said my father.
He nodded, almost smiled.
Soren is not a rookie, he said.
All right, Dad.
So why didn’t he find the gas can?
I don’t know, said my father.
Because he doesn’t care about her.
Not like we do.
I gotta go.
A tick started crawling up my leg.
All right, my father said quietly.
Where do you want to go?
Joe, he said carefully.
I should have told you I am proud of you.
I am proud of how you love your mother.
Proud of how you figured this out.
we couldn’t bear it.
You give us life .
I jumped up.
Yellow spots pulsed before my eyes.
You gave me life, I said.
That’s how it’s supposed to work.
So let me do what I want with it!
I knew my father would call Clemence and Edward’s.
The gas station was out for the same reason.
Cappy’s and Zack’s parents both had telephones.
That left Angus.
None of the cans were Hamm’s.
Angus had a scraped cheek and a fat lip.
The fact is, sometimes Star would belt him.
We wished it would.
Angus was glad to see me.
Those assholes again?
Nah, he said.
So I knew his aunt or Elwin had done it.
Do priests even drink?
Do they drink?
They start with wine at mass.
After that, I think they get shitfaced every night.
Angus had a round face and innocent long eyelashes.
He had a crazy disarray of big, gleaming, dangerous-looking teeth.
His fat bottom lip bared them in a helpless snarl.
I want to go to mass, I said.
Angus stopped with his foot in midair.
You wanna go to mass?
Is there a mass?
Sure, there’s a five o’clock.
We could just make it.
We could check that priest out, I said.
He attached it to the hollow rod with a bolt.
He put the wrench in his pocket.
I followed Angus’s lead, genuflected, and sat down.
We took front-row seats.
I thought I had prepared myself.
Shut up, he said.
My eyes stuck to Father Travis.
Boys called Father Travis Pan Face for his expressionless features.
Angus kicked me.
I’ll puke if you do that again, I hissed.
Angus had a cigarette.
I must have looked as bad as I felt.
I’m gonna go find Cappy.
Yeah, I said.
Why don’t you.
You ran away?
His eyes went sharp with pity and he rode off.
I shut my eyes.
I fell into a drowse sudden as a fainting spell.
There’s no smoking on the playground, he said.
One of the nuns saw you.
I opened my lips and a hoarse little sound emerged.
Father Travis continued.
But you are welcome at Holy Mass.
Again, I made some sound.
You’re Clemence Milk’s nephew.
Yes, I said.
Clemence Milk is my auntie.
Now, remarkably, I found my legs under me.
My father’s phrasing left my mouth.
May I ask you a question?
What day was that?
The grave mouth tucked at the corners.
It was a Sunday.
I suppose I was officiating.
I don’t really remember.
And then after mass there was the Adoration.
There is always a reason, said Father Travis.
Can I ask you another question?
No, said the priest.
One question per day.
It glowed red.
You don’t give your parents trouble.
We would love to have you in our youth group.
I saw his teeth for the first time.
They were too white and even to be real.
Young as he was, but with false teeth!
He put his hand out.
The callow artist’s rendering of features resolved.
Too handsome to be handsome, Clemence had said.
We stood there.
He held his hand out steady.
His palm was cool.
The callus smooth and tough, like Cappy’s dad.
So we’ll see you then.
He turned away.
Then looked back with the hint of a grin.
Cigarettes will kill you.
I was filled with that odd energy.
I was allowing the tree to help me think.
I could hardly have refused.
The door to the church basement.
Cappy appeared with Angus.
Cappy’s aunts must have made the salad.
My mother made it that way.
I scraped my spoon against the inside of the bag.
My dad said he was in Lebanon.
Whatever, said Cappy.
He was a Marine.
So was my dad, said Cappy.
I did get his alibi.
I have to check it.
Angus said, His what?
He says he officiated at mass that Sunday afternoon.
All I have to do is ask Clemence.
Anybody would drink free beer, especially you, Starboy, said Cappy.
We got to catch him drinking Hamm’s in private.
Spy on him.
Look in a priest’s window?
Yes, said Cappy.
When it’s dark, we’ll sneak up to the house.
Do the priests have a dog?
No dog, said Angus.
Good, I said.
It was the cemetery that unnerved me.
I had recently seen a ghost.
Mooshum remembered it.
The men were buried to the west with the traditionals.
They vanished into the earth.
Shawanobinesiik, Elizabeth, Southern Thunderbird.
Adik, Michael, Caribou.
Kwiingwa’aage, Joseph, Wolverine.
Mashkiki, Mary, The Medicine.
Ombaashi, Albert, Lifted By Wind.
Makoons, The Bearling, and Bird Shaking Ice Off Its Wings.
The old cemetery was filled with its complications.
She fed the rez dogs.
As we got near, we prepared.
Cappy had his pepper can.
Angus stripped some willow wands for a whip.
They flashed up to us, barking with a vicious intensity.
They sense fear, yelled Cappy.
Angus gave a hideous yell.
Get him off me!
It yipped and disappeared.
They snapped and gnashed like land sharks.
Cappy peppered another dog.
I clobbered two.
The peppered dogs recovered and jumped back, drooling for revenge.
They formed a circle and advanced, stiff-legged.
Ah shit, he said.
We’re gonna die.
We need fire, cried Angus.
I clubbed a dog.
It popped up.
All of a sudden the dogs’ heads turned.
Their ears perked.
As one pack they loped off.
We heard the door of the little house slam.
She must be feeding them, said Cappy.
We were safe in the graveyard.
It was nearly dusk.
We wheeled our bikes down toward it.
The dogless dead felt safe.
We each had ancestors in common, dotted here and there.
It’s time, said Cappy when we reached the bottom.
The gate was loosely held together by the padlocked chain.
We pulled it wide and eased our bikes through.
Father Travis lived there by himself.
We crouched into a scraggly bush.
I wanna look in, whispered Angus.
He’ll see you, I said.
Angus raised his head.
He came down quick.
He’s sitting there watching!
Did he see you?
There was a pause.
The priest’s silhouette loomed behind the curtain.
We pressed ourselves to the clapboard.
Just behind our heads a gentle splattering started.
Cappy mouthed the question Taking a piss?
It took a long time and there were pauses.
He’s a low-key pisser, said Cappy.
Well, he is a priest, said Angus.
Do they piss funny?
They don’t have sex, said Angus.
With no regular use, maybe the plumbing could get rusty.
Like you know, said Cappy.
You guys stay here.
It was open, to catch the June breeze.
I could see the back of Father Travis’s head.
Not a television movie.
I sank down and crept back.
He’s got a VHS player!
What’s he watching?
There were no rental places on the reservation yet.
He must own it, I said, forgetting the open window.
He owns a copy?
Shut up, you guys, whispered Cappy.
He’s got his screens in.
We put our heads together and spoke low.
Could you see it very good?
I could see it fine.
He’s got a thirty-inch.
We were still in delicious shock.
Then toothbrushing and gargling noises.
Then the light went on in the bedroom.
We edged along the foundation.
The curtains were transparent panels.
We could see just fine.
He had big hard muscled shoulders and rocklike pecs.
Crazed scars looped down the divided slabs of his stomach.
He shed his boxers and stood butt-naked, then turned around.
Everything down there was scar tissue—ridged, slick, gray, purple.
We panicked, scrambled away.
The lights went out.
Cappy and I kept running.
Or I’ll rip off his head.
We slowed and looked back.
He had Angus by the throat.
He means it!
Say your Hail Marys, said the priest.
Hail Mary, Angus choked.
Silently, said Father Travis.
Angus’s mouth began to move.
Cappy and I turned and walked back.
Father Travis walked Angus before him, to the house.
As you know, there’s no back way out, he said.
So you might as well make yourselves comfortable.
He turned it to face us.
Then he sat down.
His chest was massive.
Long time no see, he said to me and Angus.
We were petrified.
Got an eyeful, huh?
You dumb monkeys.
But we couldn’t.
Okay, dogface, he said to Cappy.
You tell me why you were spying on me.
I know these two, but I don’t know you.
What’s your name?
John Pulls Leg.
A jolt of admiration shot straight through me.
That Cappy could give a fake name at this moment.
What kind of frickin’ name is that?
It’s an old traditional name, Sir!
Where’d you get that Sir!
My father was a Marine, Sir!
Then you’ve disgraced him, you puling ass-wipe shit.
Son of a Marine spying on a priest.
What’s your dad’s name?
Same name, Sir!
So you’re Pulls Leg Junior?
Well, Pulls Leg Junior, how’s this?
Cappy hit the floor hard but didn’t cry out.
Pulls Leg, huh?
Is that how you got your dumb-shit name?
Doe’s your father?
He pointed a thick finger at Angus.
And I know who your aunt is.
He stuck his finger in my face next.
I couldn’t breathe.
I started thinking about your question earlier this evening.
Like you were asking for my alibi.
I thought it was funny.
Then I remembered what happened to your mom.
We were studying them closely.
We could feel his hammered silver eyes on us.
So you think I hurt your ma, he said softly.
He kicked me again.
The numbness turned to pain.
I thought maybe.
So you know.
I also had a girlfriend.
Father Travis leaned back.
I glanced up at him.
His eyes had taken on that cyborg gleam.
You had a girlfriend?
Father Travis’s face tightened to bone-white.
I could not believe Cappy’s nerve.
For a moment I thought he was dead.
That was the thing about Cappy.
He really wanted to know.
To find out about the other person.
To hear his story.
Yes, said Father Travis, at last.
His voice was thicker now, and low.
You skinny creamers don’t know about women yet.
You may think you do, but you don’t.
I was engaged to a real one.
Not even when I got hit.
She would have stayed.
I was the one who .
Do you boys like girls?
I do, said Cappy, the only one who dared answer.
Don’t waste your time on sluts, said Father Travis.
You in high school?
Going into high school, Cappy said.
All the better.
There’s a beautiful girl nobody else has noticed.
You be the one to notice her.
All right, said Cappy.
So, said Father Travis.
He spread his hands over the arms of the chair.
You want to know how it happened.
You want to know how I deal with it.
But you’re not bad boys.
I can see that now.
He stared at me.
I was at the U.
Embassy in ’83 and got lucky.
I’m here, right?
The spigot works.
I have to take extremely good care of it.
Some sex drive.
I was in seminary school before becoming a Marine.
Had a spell of anger.
Came home like this, a sign.
Sisters gas ’em.
You like to be gassed in a tunnel?
Better thing to die clean, outside.
They die like that.
He snapped his fingers.
Turn over and look at the sky, huh?
He wasn’t looking at us.
He wasn’t looking at anything now.
He waved his hand, dismissing us.
We half rose.
He was far away.
The wind was blowing harder now.
Beating the hood of the yard light so it flickered.
The pines groaned.
But the air was warm.
A south wind, brought by Shawanobinesi, the Southern Thunderbird.
A rain-bearing wind.
I asked my father if he’d talked to Soren Bjerke.
The gas can?
He’s talked to Linda.
My father tensely frowned.
Or the two of us.
Nobody else thought night and day of her.
Nobody else knew what was happening to her.
To return to the Before.
So he had no choice, not really.
Eventually, he had to talk to me.
I should visit Linda Wishkob, he said.
She stonewalled Bjerke.
But maybe .
you want to come?
Linda Wishkob was magnetically ugly.
She displayed them for my father.
There’s coffee in back here, said Linda.
I can drink it free.
She regarded my father warily, although she knew my mother.
Never mind about the coffee, said my father.
I’d like to have a word with you.
Why don’t you get someone to cover for you?
You aren’t busy.
And I was right.
My father could out-weather anybody.
Catastrophic weather of all types.
I’d even heard him speculate about weather in the afterlife.
You really put her through the wringer, Dad.
It was especially good that day.
It was always burnt.
He kept drinking it expressionlessly after we’d finished the soup.
She’s been through the wringer enough, for real.
Dad had finally allowed Cappy to come over that day.
As always, my mother was sleeping.
There was a soft tap.
I’ll just wait for her to wake up, said Linda.
She nodded at Cappy and sat down behind us.
We taste the nearness of defeat.
Our bionic arm reaches, crushes, flexes, feints, folds.
I am that soldier.
Or Cappy is that soldier.
The Bionic Commando.
Our destination: enemy headquarters.
The heart of our hated foe’s impregnable fortress.
The challenge: impossible.
Our resolve: unflagging.
Our courage: quitless.
Our audience: Linda Wishkob.
She hardly breathed or moved a muscle.
Then she started walking up the stairs.
Linda Wishkob did not seem to notice my mother’s agitation.
The door remained open.
I heard the bed creak.
The scrape of Linda’s chair.
And then their voices, as they started to talk.
My pictures bored me.
My mother’s presence upstairs had killed that habit off.
I took her a sandwich, but she was asleep.
I took out the Tolkien set.
Upstairs she went, with hardly a look at me.
But my father did.
You be the bait.
She’ll talk to you, Joe.
She likes you.
She likes your mother.
Me, she’s wary of.
Listen to them upstairs.
Why do you want her to talk?
But she’s a Wishkob.
Remember the case, Joe, the case we pulled.
I don’t think it’s relevant.
It was Linda’s favorite food.
Even on a rainy day?
She asked what flavor.
I told her we had the striped stuff.
Neapolitan, she said, and accepted a bowl.
The spice is excellent, I said.
Real cinnamon I buy in jars, not cans.
From a foreign food section down in Hornbacher’s, Fargo.
Not the stuff you get here.
Sometimes I use a little lemon zest or orange peel.
I’ll bring two loaves next time, Linda said lovingly.
Linda, I said, I heard.
You know I wonder.
I guess I’m asking a personal question.
Maybe nobody asked her personal questions.
I thought quickly and let my tongue fly.
But I guess nobody ever talks about getting .
I wanted to know her story.
I ate more ice cream.
Once she’d pushed away the bowl, she started for real.
My brother was born two minutes before me.
I then proceeded to die in earnest.
The answer was no.
No, let it die.
I took a blazing breath.
Nurse, said the doctor.
Too late, she answered.
George Lark refused to have me in their house.
This was five decades ago.
I’m fifty now.
So I was saved and grew up with the Wishkobs.
That presence stayed with me.
I stood beside Mom holding her skirt—green cotton.
I hid my face in the scent of heated cloth.
I woke alone in another white room.
They woke me first and brought me into the kitchen.
You’re gonna see things sometimes, Mom told me once.
Your soft spot stayed open longer than most babies.
That’s how spirits get in.
Put your feet out, Tuffy, he said.
That was my nickname.
Neither Mom nor Dad ever told me I was wrong.
Mom’s job had not lasted.
Dad sold firewood, corn, squash.
All of which is not to say they were perfect.
Mom’s temper was explosive.
She never hit, but she yelled and raved.
Worse, she could say awful things.
Once, Sheryl was twirling around in the house.
There was a shelf set snugly in the corner.
Mom had been working at the stove.
She whirled around, threw her hands out.
Damn you, Sheryl, she said.
That was the only beautiful thing I ever had.
Tuffy broke it!
said Sheryl, bolting out the door.
It happened in a few months.
I stayed on, in the quiet.
Mom and Dad had stationed the television in the kitchen.
But I prefer my couch.
One night the telephone rang.
I answered it with a simple hello.
There was a pause.
A woman asked if this was Linda Wishkob speaking.
It is, I said.
I experienced a strange skip of apprehension.
I knew that something was about to happen.
This is your mother, Grace Lark.
The voice was tight and nervous.
I set the phone back down in the cradle.
Later, that moment struck me as very funny.
As you know, I am a government employee.
But I didn’t want to know anything about them.
Why would I?
I don’t mind being alone, except for, well .
One stumped me.
He’d heard it all of his life.
I had always thought I hated my birth mother, too.
But the woman had called herself, simply, mother.
My brain had perfectly taped the words she said.
I was relieved that on the third day they stopped.
Then, on the fourth day, the woman called again.
She began by apologizing.
I am sorry to bother you!
I asked his name.
It was an old family name.
Was mine an old family name as well?
No, said Grace Lark, it just matched your brother’s name.
The dog would snore and twitch in his dreams.
Those had been my choices.
Which should I elect to overcome me first?
I could not decide.
So we met.
She was so ordinary.
We did not touch hands or certainly hug.
My birth mother stared at me.
You aren’t .
her voice fell off.
She composed herself.
You got your coloring from your father, she said.
George had dark hair.
There wasn’t anything about her that called to me.
A mutual instinct for avoidance, I guess.
Would you like to order?
Grace Lark asked, touching the menu.
Have anything you like, it’s all on me.
No, thank you, we will split the check, I answered.
We got through the dinner of walleye and pilaf.
I wish I hadn’t ever given you up, she wept.
Her tears dried up.
He’s very sick, she said.
Her face became sharp and direct.
He’s got kidney failure and is on dialysis.
He’s waiting for a kidney.
George is dead.
You are your brother’s only hope.
Now is the time to call Sheryl, I thought.
I should have called her before.
She’d known where I lived all along, of course.
Sheryl was all business.
I’m calling Cedric down in South Dakota.
Listen here, Tuffy.
Who else could make me laugh under the circumstances?
I was still in bed the next morning.
You’re not seriously even considering it, Sheryl said.
Then, after I didn’t answer, Are you?
I don’t know.
Then I really am calling Cedric up.
You’re my sister.
I don’t want you to share your kidneys.
Did you ever think of that?
Save your damn kidney for me!
I love you, Sheryl said, and I said it back.
And tiny motel soaps she’d swiped.
She made my bed.
Cheryl was very Christian, so it made sense.
She’d have blamed Linden, transferred her warped hatreds to him.
I had felt the contempt and triumph in her touch.
I was thankful for the way things had turned out.
That’s why he is on dialysis.
You don’t have to be a Jesus.
I know what you did, I told him.
I’m not religious.
Interesting, said Linden.
His eyes shifted around the room.
Are you a mail carrier?
I work behind the counter, mostly.
I could do it in my sleep.
I knew their lives so well.
I could have committed the perfect murder, you know?
That took me aback.
I did not answer.
Lark pursed his lips and looked down.
Are you married?
but maybe a girlfriend.
He said this like, poor me, self-pity.
Offering compensation for her favors.
You get my drift?
I went speechless again.
She’s really too young for me.
I was waiting for her to grow up.
He’s been growing her up ever since.
No, he said.
Are you crazy?
That was me.
We sat there together, silent.
Nothing against you, he said.
This was my mother’s idea.
I don’t want your kidney.
I have an aversion to ugly people.
I don’t want a piece of you inside me.
I’d rather get on a list.
Frankly, you’re kind of a disgusting woman.
I mean, I’m sorry, but you’ve probably heard this before.
I might not be a raving beauty queen, I said.
But nobody’s ever told me I’m disgusting.
You probably have a cat, he said.
Cats pretend to love whoever feeds them.
Oh dear, I’m sorry.
He gave his face a mock slap.
Why do I say these things?
Did I hurt your feelings?
Did you say those things to drive me away?
Maybe you want to die.
You don’t want to be saved, right?
I’m not saving you for any reason.
You won’t owe me anything.
He seemed genuinely surprised.
He started laughing, showing all of those beautiful teeth.
Lots of pretty women own cats.
You don’t even have a cat.
You have a dog.
They are picky.
Look at Pearl.
Why did you do it?
She wanted it, said Linda.
But he cozied up to me.
I mean, on the surface he was not all bad.
Also, I can’t explain the hold that Mrs.
Lark could exert.
Linden was sullen to her and insulting behind her back.
Yet he’d do anything she said.
He consented because she forced him.
And after that, as you know, I became very ill.
Yes, said my father, I remember.
I realized that I had made a terrible mistake.
And Geraldine too, of course.
Also, Doe Lafournais put me through their sweat lodge.
That ceremony was so powerful.
Her voice was wistful.
And so hot!
Randall gave me a feast.
I started healing and felt even better when Mrs.
I suppose I shouldn’t say that but it’s the truth.
What do you mean by that?
He did things, said Linda.
In autumn, of course, there were leaves to rake.
It delighted him to burn them up.
During that time, Mooshum ate like a bear.
His belly rounded and his cheeks puffed out.
He was preparing for the great snows.
He owned two shovels.
When the first snow fell, he put on his galoshes.
Mooshum’s galoshes fit over his rabbit-fur-trimmed moccasins and insulated socks.
He was antlike, he hardly seemed to be moving.
His ears were still keen.
I leaned my bike against the house and untangled him.
Then I folded the net back up.
She don’t like me to use the net.
Let me hide that, he said.
I’m keeping it.
I put the claw in my pocket.
I won’t tell Clemence.
Maybe it’s got luck in it.
You need some luck?
Yes, I need luck, I said to Mooshum.
You know how things are.
I’d been at home with my mother all that time.
I wanted to ask Mooshum what it meant.
Mooshum’s eyes watered but not from pity.
The sun was beginning to glare.
Strings of hair hung around his face.
We went inside.
Mooshum pursed his mouth in displeasure.
The same medicine tea you drink every single day, Daddy.
She was making big preparations.
This peps you up.
I don’t need no more pep.
I need a place to put my pep.
How about Grandma Ignatia?
I wanted to get him going.
She’s all dried out.
She’s younger than you, said Clemence in a frosty voice.
You old buggers think you’re made for young women.
That’s what’s wrong with you.
That’s what’s keeping me alive!
That and my hair.
He took a big gulp of tea.
The stuff runs right through me, my boy.
That’s what I’ll say when I shit my pants.
Don’t you dare, said Clemence.
She said she’d be back by noon or one.
I nodded and drank the tea.
It had the sharp taste of bark.
With Clemence gone, we could get down to business.
Then I needed luck.
I asked Mooshum about the ghost and described it.
It’s not a ghost, then, Mooshum said.
What is it, then?
Someone’s throwing their spirit at you.
Somebody that you’ll see.
Could it be the man?
I took a breath.
Who hurt my mother.
Mooshum nodded and sat motionless, frowning.
No, probably not, he said at last.
For weeks mon père dreamed that horse trampled him.
Then help me get my luck, I said.
How should I start?
You go to your doodem first, Mooshum answered.
Find the ajijaak.
I told this to Mooshum.
You just go straight to your doodem and watch.
It will show you the luck, Joe.
He drank the tea, made a face.
There was a dock of gray boards, some missing.
I saw no herons at first.
I watched that bird stand.
I was getting impatient for the luck to show itself.
Okay, I said, where’s the luck?
This time a child’s face stared up at me.
A cloud passed over the sun.
There was just the doll.
The doll was packed with money.
I pushed the head back on the doll.
I looked around.
All was quiet.
Nobody in sight.
I took off the head and examined it more closely.
The doll’s head was stuffed with neatly rolled-up bills.
I was thinking one-dollar bills.
A hundred, maybe two.
My pack was hanging behind my bike seat.
I thought that my luck was probably temporary.
Sonja was taking care of a customer.
I looked at the bulletin board.
The customer finally left.
I was still cradling the doll underneath my shirt.
What’cha got there?
Something I have to show you in private.
I’ve heard that one before.
Sonja laughed and I went red.
C’mon, in here.
I took the doll from beneath my shirt.
Weird, said Sonja.
I took the head off.
Sonja shut the closet door.
Then she uncurled a couple.
They were hundred-dollar bills.
She was looking down at me in the dim office.
Those bills are wet.
The doll was in the lake.
Anybody see you fish it out?
Anybody see you with the doll?
Sonja took the canvas deposit pouch out of a drawer.
Another next to it read, Smile, You’re on Candid Camera.
That the camera was fake was a big secret.
Where’s your dad?
We’ll be back late afternoon.
Where are we going?
To my house, first.
Sure, said Whitey, waving us off.
The rest of the car was vacuumed spotless.
They must have known the sound of the car.
The dogs were standing at the house, waiting.
They were Pearl’s sisters—Ball and Chain.
The house was a floaty blue.
Inside, the house was cool and dim.
There were four small rooms.
Spook whinnied, a love sound.
Perfume wafted out.
They were all hundreds.
Sonja used a flashlight to peer down the doll’s neck.
At last, I put the head back on.
Put it back in the bag, said Sonja.
She wiped her wrist across her forehead and upper lip.
She flapped her arms up and down, patted her armpits.
Go out in the kitchen and get me some water.
I gotta change my shirt.
I went out to the kitchen and opened the refrigerator.
The well on the place sucked up sweet water.
Sonja always kept a jug of it cold.
Then I filled it back up for Sonja.
She drank the water.
Whew, she said.
We went out to the car.
Sonja took the doll with her in the plastic bag.
She locked it in the trunk.
They sold his land, Sonja shrugged.
Only this time Sonja mentioned a big bingo win.
I’ll say, said the bank manager.
We kept going, drove to Argus.
At another she mentioned a racehorse.
Then she went back to the bingo win.
I didn’t care.
I told Sonja there was over forty thousand dollars.
It was a full-size baby doll, she said.
How come we couldn’t keep out at least one bill?
Once I thought about it, I was disappointed.
Okay, said Sonja.
Here’s the thing.
Wherever that money came from?
They are gonna want it back.
I shouldn’t tell anybody.
But can you do that?
I’ve never known a guy who could keep a secret.
Even from your dad?
Even from Cappy?
She heard me hesitate before I answered.
They’d whale on him too, she said.
Maybe kill him.
So you zip it and keep it zipped.
On your mother’s life.
She knew what she was saying.
She knew without looking that tears started in my eyes.
Okay, I swear.
We have to bury the passbooks.
The sun was in its branches.
There were prayer flags, strips of cloth.
Some cloths were faded, some new.
This was the tree where those ancestors were hanged.
None of the killers ever went on trial.
She pushed the key into her front jeans pocket.
Remember the day.
It was June 17.
Invisible, I said.
We need to wash our hands, said Sonja.
There was some water in the ditch.
We used that.
But I want shoes like Cappy’s.
Yeah, she said.
I’d say I had a job at the gas station.
You want one?
Pleasure flooded into me so that I couldn’t speak.
It frightened me to suddenly think that way.
You don’t swear on the job, said Sonja.
You’re representing something.
We drove for a few miles.
I asked what I was representing.
Reservation-based free market enterprise.
People are watching us.
Who’s watching us?
I mean, resentful ones.
Like those Larks who owned Vinland.
He’s been here, but he’s nice to me.
Like, he’s not so bad.
Yeah, that one.
You should watch out for him, I said.
Whitey hates his guts.
When I’m nice to him, he gets so jealous.
How come you wanna make Whitey jealous?
All of a sudden, I was jealous too.
He thinks he owns me.
Then she looked away, still smiling with manic glee.
Thinks he owns me.
But he’ll find out he don’t, huh?
Am I right?
He made few movements.
I stood in the doorway.
She had lashed out at me and terrified my father.
I didn’t want to walk past my mother’s shut door.
I was hungry.
Maybe you want a glass of milk, said my father.
Get yourself a glass of milk and sit down.
Your aunt made a cake for us.
My father waved me to it.
I brought three of the pieces to the table.
I poured myself a glass of milk.
So I sat down with the men.
And I realized I had made a mistake.
Not the gas can truth.
Yes, said Bjerke.
His no-flinch gaze pierced the scum on his eyeglasses.
We’ll do an affidavit.
All in time.
If we have a case.
Before I forget.
Is he the forgetful type?
No, said my father.
Wrestling, I said.
They struggled to not look skeptical.
Or maybe cross-country?
That seemed more believable.
There’s something, I said.
I wanted another piece, this time with ice cream.
said my father.
Bjerke wiped his lips.
There was a file, I said.
Bjerke put down his napkin.
The two of them nodded at me patiently.
He lowered his head and stared at me.
That gilded octopus ticked on the wall.
Please don’t tell Mom I said this.
Joe, said my father.
A week ago, I remembered about the file.
So I asked her if they found the file.
She said there was no file.
She said that I should never mention a file.
But there was a file.
She went after it.
That file is why this happened.
I stopped talking and my mouth hung open.
That is not all, said my father suddenly.
That is not all you know.
He leaned over the table in that way he had.
He loomed, he seemed to grow.
I tried to shrug it off.
That’s it, I said.
But he just loomed.
Bjerke leaned forward too.
I pushed my chair back, a little wildly.
Take it easy, said my dad.
Just tell what you know.
Across the fence line, down by the lakeshore.
There was a cooler and a pile of clothes.
We didn’t touch the clothes.
What about the cooler?
Well, I believe we opened that.
What was in it?
asked my father.
Two six-packs, I said.
I sat stunned at how quickly it had happened.
Or under Sonja’s direction.
It was me helping Sonja, after all.
She was the one who’d had the idea.
I jumped up.
I gotta go!
Did he smell like beer?
I heard my father ask.
No, said Bjerke.
Read it, said my father.
I sat down.
It was a citation, though just on scrap paper.
It mentioned juvenile detention.
Should I cite your friends too?
I drank both six-packs.
Where would we find the cans?
They were Hamm’s.
Bjerke didn’t seem to think the brand was remarkable.
He didn’t even jot this down.
That area was under surveillance, he said.
We were hoping he’d come get his beer.
But I guess you drank it first.
I’m sorry, sir.
They were Hamm’s.
We thought .
Leaden, I climbed the stairs.
I went into my own room and shut the door.
My walls were painted a soft yellow.
Her own clan was the turtle.
That boy had perished, Clemence had told me.
The turtle’s message had been about mortality.
Sounds were muted—a horse neighed over the trees.
I watched this shadow.
My mother’s job was to know everybody’s secrets.
My mother kept her files locked in a safe.
Would it help if we had a woman?
I don’t think so.
She would feel betrayed by me.
Anything but go back upstairs, into the bedroom.
The three of us went upstairs.
My father first, then Bjerke, me last.
My father said something.
My father opened the door.
His face was glossy with sweat.
We’d best get this over with.
Don’t let him see you this way.
Her voice was a crow’s jeer.
He can take it.
He’s seen it.
But he’d rather be with his friends.
Let him go, Bazil.
Then I’ll talk to you.
Geraldine, he knows something.
He’s told us something.
My mother crunched herself into a smaller ball.
Coutts, said Bjerke, I apologize for bothering you again.
Is this true?
There was no movement or sound from my mother.
Bjerke tried again.
But she waited us out.
She didn’t turn to us.
She didn’t move.
My father finally lifted his hand and whispered, Enough.
My mother did not react.
Like a family again, he said.
We were starting this regimen now.
I took a deep breath and carried up the tablecloth.
He put them in a small painted vase.
Kennedy was assassinated.
They had a good view and watched the street expectantly.
He was poised on circumstance.
Interesting, my father said.
A flagpole sitter.
Kennedy, looking straight ahead.
The shots sounded like a car had backfired.
The car halted.
Then more shots.
Then she began to live on that island.
She made a fish trap and lived off fish.
She knew by then that something very bad had happened.
Then the wind changed and blew directly against her.
At that moment she felt something rise beneath her.
She waded out and turned to thank it.
Then she found her brothers and sisters.
It was true about the disaster.
The Corinthians sailed away.
A recording would cause his song to become finite.
Thus, Uncle was against recorded music.
I’m going to have to leave tomorrow, he said.
My mother did not move.
I want to meet with Gabir.
He will not decline this.
But I have to keep him connected.
And it’s good to see my old friend.
But there will be, I am sure of that.
And that will help, I think.
My mother spoke.
My father leaned forward pointing like that gundog, motionless.
she spoke again.
He rattled on.
But his adoption scheme blew up in his face.
But she could be any tribe.
Where’s her mother?
She has disappeared.
My mother raised herself in bed.
The she actually got out of bed.
She began to retch.
Her puke was startling, bright green.
Her arms moved with disconcerting violence, punching, blocking, pushing.
She kicked and twisted.
It’s all right now.
She slowed and then stopped.
Her eyes were black, black in her gray face.
I was raped, Bazil.
He seemed frozen.
There is no evidence of what he did.
My mother’s voice was a croak.
My father bent near.
There is, though.
We went straight to the hospital.
And there is your own memory.
And there are other things.
I remember everything.
I shrank back and tried to be invisible.
There was a call.
It was Mayla.
I only knew her by her family.
She’s hardly ever been here.
Just a girl, so young!
She’d begun the enrollment process for her child.
She’d listed him, my mother whispered.
Do you remember his name?
My mother’s mouth dropped open, her eyes unfocused.
Keep going, dear.
What happened next?
Mayla asked to meet me at the round house.
She had no car.
My father drew a sharp breath.
I drove into that weedy lot, parked the car.
I started out.
He tackled me as I was walking up the hill.
Took the keys.
Then he pulled out a sack.
He dragged it over my head so fast.
It was a light rosy material, loose, maybe a pillowcase.
He tied my hands behind me.
I don’t know what file he’s talking about.
He turned me around and marched me .
held my shoulder.
Step over this, go that way, he said.
He took me somewhere.
said my father.
Can you say anything about where?
That’s where it happened.
He kept the sack on me.
And he raped me.
Did you go uphill or downhill?
I don’t know, Bazil.
Through the woods?
Did leaves brush you?
I don’t know.
What about the ground—gravel?
Was there a barbed-wire fence?
Three classes of land meet there, my father said.
His voice pulled tight with fear.
Tribal trust, state, and fee.
That’s why I’m asking.
I don’t know.
All right, said my father.
All right, keep going.
He dragged me up to the round house.
It took a while to get there.
Was he marching me around?
I was sick.
I don’t remember.
it was a pillowcase, a plain pink one.
That was when I saw her.
Just a girl.
And her baby playing in the dust.
She’d come in on Friday and filed the papers.
Her hair was cut so nice.
She wore a knit dress, pale purple.
And the baby was with her.
I played with that baby in my office.
So that’s who made the call that day.
I need that file, she said.
My life depends on that file, she said.
She was thrown on the ground.
Her hands were taped up behind her.
The baby crawled over the dirt floor.
Like Mayla’s eyes.
Big, brown eyes.
But he had Mayla tied up, taped up.
Mayla and I looked at each other.
I nodded to her.
He wore slacks.
Every word sticks with me, every single word he said.
He said, I am really one sick fuck.
But he still wanted her.
He still needed her.
I won’t get caught, he said.
I’ve been boning up on law.
He nudged me with his shoe.
I know as much law as a judge.
Know any judges?
I have no fear.
Things are the wrong way around, he said.
The strong should rule the weak.
Instead of the weak the strong!
It is the weak who pull down the strong.
But I won’t get caught.
But, honey, I couldn’t.
That’s love, huh?
I couldn’t do it.
But I have to, you know.
All your fucking shit’s in your car.
You don’t need anything where you’re going.
You want to tell me where the money is?
The money he gave you?
Oh, you do?
Oh, you do now?
He ripped the tape away.
She couldn’t talk, then she gasped out, My car.
Ah, he said, well isn’t that.
Don’t talk no more.
I don’t want to hear it, he said to Mayla.
I am taking you back with me .
unless you, dirt.
Then he bent over and looked into my face.
He said to me, I’m sorry.
I might be having an episode.
I’m not really a bad person.
I didn’t hurt you, did I?
Maybe I should burn the evidence.
You know, they’re just evidence.
He put her down gently.
He uncapped the gas can.
He was saying, Oh no, oh no.
He said, Sshhh, sshhh.
Then I got on my bike and went to work.
I saw my father before I left.
He had stayed in the bedroom with my mother.
He’d sat up next to her all night.
She needed to know the baby was safe.
Mayla was safe.
What do you think’s in that file?
Something to work with.
And Mayla Wolfskin?
What about her?
And she’s related to your mother’s friend LaRose.
That’s not what I meant.
What about Mayla Wolfskin, Dad?
Is she alive?
That’s the question.
What do you think?
I perused that floor, memorizing the randomness.
Why would he kill her?
He held me there, not speaking.
Then he let me go and walked away.
Sometimes, he turned it off and pumped out music.
Whitey pumped gas when customers came, checked oil, and gossiped.
I washed the car windows.
They’d both work until seven p.
When I got home, my father was waiting for me.
How was work?
It was good.
My father looked at his knuckles, flexed his hand, frowned.
To the hospital.
They’ll keep her a couple of days.
I’m going back down tomorrow.
She just has to rest.
She sleeps all the time.
He paused, then finally looked at me, a relief.
She knows who it was, he said.
Of course, but she still won’t tell me, Joe.
She has to overcome his threats.
Do you have an idea?
I can’t say, you know that.
But I should know.
Is he from around here, Dad?
It would fit .
but he won’t show up here.
He knows he’ll get caught.
Not soon enough.
She’s going to be better once that begins.
I feel certain she’ll remember where, too—where it happened.
The shock of telling.
But then some resolution.
What about Mayla Wolfskin?
Did he keep her with him?
And that baby?
My father’s face told me yes.
But I couldn’t stop your mother.
I was afraid she might stop talking.
I had to know.
It’s good I know, I said.
But it was a poison in me.
I was just beginning to feel that.
I’ll stay with Whitey and Sonja.
That way they can bring me to work.
We had Pearl with us.
And that made me happy.
Soon we’d have Mooshum’s birthday.
Everyone would come for that.
I’d see my cousins.
Things could be normal.
I didn’t know how bad I’d needed noise.
It cost that much gas anyway to come and go.
They each took free coffee every time.
She was having a great old time.
Smashed into a freight train, drunk, and lived.
Used the prairie nigger word for Indians.
Thought it was funny.
Had a mistress in Dead Eye.
He is a gun lover slash freak.
Collects war shields.
Said the Sun Dance was a form of devil worship.
Oh, and he’s all tanned up.
Vain about his looks.
What you been up to today?
she asked each dog.
Not the burr patch again.
You smell like you ate shit.
He’d whipped up a foamy beer batter.
There was coleslaw made with horseradish.
They always had dessert.
Sonja insisted on dessert, said Whitey.
She’s got a sweet tooth.
Have you ever heard of raspberry fool?
I made it for her from a recipe once.
Or mayonnaise cake?
You can’t taste the mayonnaise.
But she likes chocolate.
She’s crazy for chocolate.
The couch was old and smelled of cigarettes.
We watched TV together for an hour or even two.
I’m scared as shit.
You should be too.
Keep your eyes open.
Don’t slip up, Joe.
Sonja made me promise I would go to college.
She said she’d wanted her daughter, Murphy, to go.
But her daughter had changed her name to London.
Sonja liked the talk shows, the old movies.
Her soft weight on the far cushion.
Every night, Sonja gave me a pillow off her bed.
I buried my face to breathe it in.
I dozed, dreamed, returning to the flickering TV light.
The laugh track, turned low.
Sonja tranced in a blue haze, drinking cold water now.
Outside, the seething of summer insects.
And Whitey, thankfully, snoring it off behind the bedroom door.
She was eating a pretzel.
Whitey loved kamikaze pulps.
He began his morning at six a.
with a cup of coffee and a paperback.
She called it breakfast casserole.
We opened at seven a.
There was always someone waiting for gas.
You have too seen them.
She flashed a flirty smile.
The earrings sparkled in the dim kitchen.
They’re rhinestones, she said.
Nice rhinestones, said Whitey.
He gave an underhanded glance.
We got in the truck.
Whitey didn’t turn on the music.
I was sitting in the jump seat behind them.
It happened right in front of me.
It’s okay, said Sonja to me, over her shoulder.
Whitey’s feeling low.
Whitey’s jaw was still set in that mean way.
He stared straight ahead.
Yeah, he said.
Not the kind of hungover you’re thinking of.
Whitey had a jailhouse spit—so sleek, so accurate.
Sonja just moved over, parked, and unlocked the station.
This was the second bad thing.
I went over to wait on him.
Fill ’er up, he said.
I unlocked the gas tanks and pumped gas.
His car was dusty.
It was an old Dodge.
His voice was genial.
He began counting fives from a wad of bills.
He handed over three of them.
My car was thirsty, he said.
I drove all night.
Say, how are you?
It is confusing, plus he was a customer.
So I was polite and said I was fine, thanks.
Oh, that’s good, he said.
I hear that you’re a real good kid.
I took him in, now, put him together.
A good kid?
Second white man to say that this summer.
My thought was, This could wreck me.
I don’t have any children.
Gee, too bad, I said like I meant the opposite.
Now I was put off.
I still couldn’t place him.
I don’t know.
I suppose it’s luck, starting a good family and all.
Having a loving family.
It’s pretty nice.
Gives you an advantage in life.
Who doesn’t have a loving family.
I turned to walk off.
Oh, I’ve said too much.
Come back here!
He tried to give me another five.
I kept walking.
He looked down and turned the ignition key.
The engine coughed and caught.
Well, that’s me, he called.
Always saying too much.
He slapped the side of the car.
Say what you will, you’re the judge’s son.
I whirled around.
I was mad at Whitey.
I’d pumped gas for the enemy.
Sonja bothered me too.
She came out of the station, chewing gum.
As her jaws worked, those earrings twitched and flashed.
Those jeans fit her like paint.
The morning seemed to last forever.
I had to stay because Whitey was gone.
Later on she gave Whitey’s sandwich to me.
Mom always talked about going to school with them.
LaRose figured in her stories.
LaRose was always there and not there.
She had started out a Migwan.
His neck bulged, his arms inflated.
He sank his weight on the wrench.
He knelt back on his feet.
Even the dust was hot that day.
Again, he gave Sonja that crafty look.
C’mon, she said to me.
I need another pack of smokes.
She put her hand on my back, an auntielike gesture.
She steered me forward.
We went into the store and were alone together.
She reached behind the counter for what she needed.
I didn’t care how elusive LaRose was, I’d question her.
I asked her if she was related to Mayla Wolfskin.
She’s my cousin, lots younger than me, said LaRose.
Her dad was Crow Creek.
Did you grow up with her?
What’s going on?
I just want to know.
You a FBI, Joe?
Gave a stipend of money, everything.
Mayla got in the papers—my aunt clipped the article.
Chosen for an internship.
She looked so nice.
I know that much.
She worked for that one governor, you know.
He did all those bad things.
Nothing stuck to him.
Ah, shit, said Sonja.
That’s no good.
LaRose said, My tire.
I’ll fix it.
She smiled at me—the reflection of a smile.
A silver tooth glinted when she smoked.
Have a go at it, my boy.
First I went and found the wrench in the weeds.
They were sipping cream sodas.
Smoke drifted from her fingers.
I’ll take care of customers, if we get any.
I stared at the lug nuts.
Oooh, said LaRose when I brought that out.
Good choice, said Sonja.
I poured all of my strength down on the handle.
But it didn’t budge.
I turned around.
Sweat was dripping off me.
They ignored LaRose and, more elaborately, Sonja.
They came up to stand around the flat.
Rusted out, man.
They each tried the ratchet.
Cappy asked for Sonja’s lighter, applied flame.
That didn’t work either.
You got WD-40?
I showed Cappy where it was on Whitey’s tool bench.
He fit the wrench on, tighter.
Step on it again, he said to Angus.
I came out and looked at Sonja.
We got Whitey out after only three beers.
LaRose got her tire fixed.
We had a sudden rush and then everything quieted down.
We closed the place and got into the truck.
Neither of them touched the tape deck.
We ate, nobody saying much.
Whitey drank, morose, but Sonja stuck to 7Up.
There was a crash.
The lights were out and there was no moon.
In the bedroom, low vehemence.
Steady grating of Whitey’s voice.
A heavy thud.
Quit that, Whitey.
He give ’em to you?
There’s no he.
It’s just you, baby.
The crack of a slap, a cry.
Joe’s out there.
Doan fucking care.
Now he was calling her names one after another.
I got up and went to the door.
My blood pulsed and swam.
I thought I’d kill Whitey.
I was not afraid.
There was silence.
Come out and fight me!
Sonja had put the lamp on.
His fifties hairdo hung off his forehead in strings.
The punch reverberated up my arm.
My hand went numb.
I broke it, I thought, and was exhilarated.
Me and Sonja.
This is just between us, Joe.
Stay out of it.
You ever hear of cheating?
Rhinestone, she interjected.
I know diamonds when I see ’em.
He let me go and stepped away.
He tried to reclaim some dignity.
He put his hands up.
I won’t touch her, see?
I won’t touch her.
But she is dirty.
His eyes rolled toward her, red with weeping now.
Someone else, Joe .
But I knew that wasn’t true.
I knew where those earrings came from.
I gave ’em to her, Whitey, I said.
He’d had a bottle in the room.
How come you gave her earrings?
It was her birthday.
A year ago.
Asshole, what’s it to you!
And you’re right.
They aren’t rhinestones.
I think they are genuine cubic zirconiums.
Okay, Joe, he said.
He looked tearfully at Sonja.
Propped himself against the door.
Then he frowned at me.
Asshole, what’s it to you!
Some way to talk to your uncle.
You crossed a line, boy.
Well, she’s my aunt, I said.
So I can give her a birthday present.
You got it coming, little man!
Watch the glass.
You come in here, Joe.
Then she locked the door behind me.
Get in, she said, pointing at the bed.
Go straight to sleep.
I’m sitting up.
I got into the bed between the sheets.
He could be dead out there, I said.
No, he ain’t.
That was an empty.
’Sides, I know just how hard to hit him.
Bet he says that about you, too.
She didn’t answer.
Why’d you say that?
Why’d you say you gave me them earrings?
Because I did.
Oh, the money.
I’m not stupid.
She was quiet.
Then I heard her crying softly.
I wanted something nice, Joe.
See what happened?
It’s like you said.
Don’t touch the money.
And where’d you put the earrings?
I threw them out.
No you didn’t.
Those are diamonds.
But she didn’t answer.
She just kept rocking.
The next morning Sonja and I left early.
I didn’t see Whitey.
He’s gonna walk it off in the woods, said Sonja.
He’ll be good for a long time now.
But maybe you better stay with Clemence tonight.
We rode to town, no music.
I watched the ditches out the side window.
Because I quit.
Oh, honey, no, she said.
But she pulled over and stopped the car.
I felt sorry for myself.
Her blue eyes had a devious sheen.
Come on, she said.
I’m onna need help.
The back kitchen door was open.
I walked in and called out.
You get back there.
I shook my head and wouldn’t look at her.
They at it again?
Whitey’s back at it?
You stay here then.
Mooshum’s in Evey’s room.
I set up a cot for him there.
He won’t sleep on Evey’s soft bed.
That day I helped Clemence out.
We ate fried venison with mustard and browned onions.
He talks in his sleep.
I don’t care.
Mooshum’s snore was a very old man’s hypnotizing purr.
I fell immediately asleep.
He was telling a story.
She liked the liver of the deer.
She had heavy bones and a short, thick neck.
Her husband, Mirage, appeared and disappeared.
He looked at other woman.
She had caught him many times but stayed with him.
The reservation year.
Sure enough, she could not get another fish after that.
Some people in these hungry times became possessed.
A wiindigoo could cast its spirit inside of a person.
That’s what was happening, her husband decided.
But not before you had agreement in the matter.
You couldn’t do it alone.
But one, the oldest boy, was left.
If her husband killed her, Akiikwe’s people might take revenge.
He was twelve years old.
The men would hold her.
He should cut her neck.
His name was Nanapush.
But he got angry.
Ah, said his mother, you are a good son.
You will not kill me.
You’re the only one I will not eat!
But they wrestled her down.
Now the men brought her back tied in cords.
She screamed and fought the straps, but then grew quiet.
She ate the snow.
She began to walk away.
Again, the men tied her up.
They made a fire and a shelter.
She sang this song to her son.
It was a buffalo song.
Why a buffalo song?
Because the fish missed the buffalo.
They wished the buffalo would come back.
They asked me where the buffalo had gone, said Akii.
I couldn’t tell them.
Nobody had seen a buffalo for years.
The two slept that night.
They slept and slept.
But Nanapush had some wire for a snare.
They went to sleep again.
Then she crept back to her son with the rabbit.
The rabbit gave itself to you, she said.
Nanapush roasted the rabbit, ate it.
Go now, she said.
I heard the same song from the rabbit.
Take the gun and travel straight into the west.
A buffalo has come back from over that horizon.
The old woman waits for you.
If you return and I am dead, do not cry.
You have been a very good son to me.
So Nanapush went out.
Mooshum stopped talking.
But at last I fell asleep too.
When I woke, I wondered again what had happened.
But he gave me another answer entirely.
Mooshum gave a dry, little creaky laugh.
An old man prone to madness!
Like me, only worse.
He should have been weeded out.
When self-discipline was called for, greed won out with Nanapush.
He was aged early on by absurdities and lies.
Old Nanapush, as they called him, or akiwenziish.
People went to him, though secretly, for healings.
What should I do?
I begged the old man.
Don’t be shy.
He acted crazy to sort his friends from his enemies.
But he spoke the truth.
What about his mother?
What about the woman no man could kill?
When she sent him for the buffalo.
What caca are you talking about, my boy?
The one you told me last night.
I told no story.
I slept the whole night through.
I slept good.
Okay then, I thought.
Maybe this time I’ll hear the end.
So I waited the next night, trying to keep awake.
But I was tired and kept dropping off.
I slept for a good while.
Ah, those first reservation years, when they squeezed us!
Down to only a few square miles.
Those were bad years.
They were nowhere.
He took up his mother’s hatchet and his father’s gun.
It broke his heart.
They covered the earth at that time.
They were endless.
He had seen that glory.
Where had they gone?
At any rate, they existed no longer.
He thought there must be a reason.
And at last, he looked down.
He saw buffalo tracks!
He found it hard to believe.
Hunger makes you see things.
The cold deepened steadily.
But it did not.
It stopped to listen.
Turned toward him.
Now the two were perhaps twenty feet apart.
You must have made yourself invisible.
Still, his hands shook and his legs kept giving out.
He knew he wasn’t thinking clearly.
Then the snow came down.
He was caught in the blind howl.
Everybody knows that.
Once there, he swooned at the sudden comfort.
And while unconscious, he became a buffalo.
This buffalo adopted Nanapush and told him all she knew.
He was held fast by solid blood.
He could not get his gun to work again.
To keep up his spirits, he began to sing.
She’d started looking for her son when the snow stopped.
Then her mind cleared and she laughed.
She knew immediately how her foolish son had trapped himself.
This buffalo knew what had happened to Nanapush’s mother.
She said wiindigoo justice must be pursued with great care.
Who is he?
I asked my father as we walked up our road.
Soon enough, he said.
She got up again, no more than a stick figure.
She rushed back and forth, refrigerator to stove to freezer.
After her long retreat, this flashing energy was upsetting.
They didn’t notice me at all, so I left.
I was glad I’d quit the station.
I skimmed along the road.
I didn’t know what either.
The other, well, she was the opposite of him.
She was I guess you’d say a dream.
Which was what we called her afterward.
Soft wide eyes of velvet brown.
Straight brown fall of hair held back by cute headband.
I turned over and saw my friends were gone.
I swam in, stood up beside my friends.
And I’m gonna ask you again how come, said Cappy.
This beach is reserved for church-authorized activities, said YEC.
I’m asking you politely to leave.
Naw, said Cappy.
We don’t wanna go.
He was squinting lazily at Dream Girl.
She hadn’t said anything.
But her eyes were on Cappy.
What do you think?
He nodded at her.
Do you think we should go?
Okay, said Cappy, if you say so.
And he walked out of the water.
I looked sideways at Cappy as he strode past.
His dick hung heavy between his legs.
There was a scream.
It was from the guy.
Hey, man, Cappy held onto his shoulder.
I’m sorry, man, said Cappy.
He’s shittin’ mad or something, Cappy said.
We laid him out.
I was the only one with socks.
I rolled one up and stuck it in his mouth.
He quit seizuring and I removed the sock.
We sent Angus up to get Father Travis.
Think fast, Number One.
Join the YEC, I said.
Yeah, said Zack.
Seek out new life-forms.
The YEC, a rosary-based primitive people .
I get it, Cappy said.
This guy converted us.
Yeah right, said pimple guy, half opening his eyes.
He passed out and puked again.
We’re cool now, man, said Cappy.
You showed us the way.
We felt a sparkle come down over us.
It happened, I said.
Holy Spirit is right on!
Right on upon us.
Praise the Christ Form.
Praise His Rez Erection.
Holy Mother’s Milk.
Lamb of Goodness Sakes.
Holy Fruity Womb!
Zack was a rotten Catholic.
His cassock swirled around his striding thighs.
But too late.
I saw those things on her face.
And I saw there was no conflict.
Oh them, said Cappy quickly.
Nobody goes near them.
You should keep on converting over here.
Lots of pagans here.
Oh, said Zelia.
Well, we don’t trespass on other missions so much, anyway.
She was Mexican, from a very close family.
Actually, you’re an Indian too, I told her.
You’re probably an Aztec, said Cappy.
This was later in the afternoon.
She and Cappy were starting to flirt.
Yes, I think you are Aztec.
Cappy eyed her half mockingly.
She looked away, but she smiled.
But neither of them looked at him.
The three of us knew we had no hope.
Cappy was the only one.
At home, my mother’s energy had faded only slightly.
She had two streaks of color on her face.
I realized she’d smeared on rouge.
She was taking iron pills and other pills.
She had made Juneberry pancakes for dinner.
My father narrowed his eyes.
You quit Whitey’s to join a youth encounter group?
I quit Whitey’s because he pasted Sonja.
My mother went rigid.
All right, said my father quickly.
What do you encounter?
We dramatize life situations.
Like if we are offered drugs.
Or me and the dealer, say, not that it happens.
Does Jesus snatch the cans from your paws?
Empty them on the ground?
That’s what we’re supposed to visualize.
Interesting, said my mother.
Her voice was neutral, formal, neither caustic nor falsely enthusiastic.
The one I thought of as my real mother.
I would get my before mom back.
The damned carcass had stolen from her.
I didn’t have the time.
Neal was our best friend now.
We had been converted with only a day left.
So we were in wrap-up sessions.
Lots of makeup.
A serpent is a serpent.
Cappy put his hands up, Just asking, man!
He fixed his eyes on the ground.
A pit viper, I said.
You were delivered of a pit viper.
Father Travis looked ominous, but Ruby looked pleased.
It’s okay, Father, she said.
Joe’s uncle is a science teacher.
If it bites your hand they chop off your arm.
That’s the treatment.
She looked proud of herself.
Those moments aren’t temptation, really.
You react on instinct.
You’re tempted then.
But a quick-acting poison, that’s different.
It strikes with blind swiftness.
You can be bit by temptation anytime.
Cappy got to lock eyes with Zelia.
This was supposed to be a soul-to-soul encounter.
A spiritual thing.
The big cottonwood clattered by the garage.
Who is it?
My father shook his head.
The thing is, my father said, the thing is.
He was choosing his words very carefully.
But even now we may be pushing the envelope.
The defense attorney is filing a motion for his release.
There’s talk by the defense of suing the BIA.
Even though we know he did it.
Even though everything matches up.
Who is it?
Why can’t they just hang him?
No, he said, broodingly.
I wish I could hang him.
We would have sat down to decide his fate.
Our present system though.
She doesn’t know where it happened, I said.
My father tipped his chin down.
There is nowhere to stand.
He made a map.
Here’s the round house.
Then a strip that was sold—fee land.
So federal law applies.
Down to the lake, that is also tribal trust.
Okay, I said, looking at the drawing.
Why can’t she make up a place?
My father turned his head and gazed at me.
The skin beneath his eyes was purple-gray.
His cheeks were loose folds.
I can’t ask her to do that.
So the problem remains.
Lark committed the crime.
On what land?
Was it tribal land?
We can’t prosecute if we don’t know which laws apply.
If it happened anyplace else .
Sure, but it happened here.
You knew this ever since Mom talked about it.
So did you, my father said.
For instance, he said nothing about dogs.
From Montana, is what Zack heard.
After their leadership workshop they would all leave.
The workshop lasted three days and Cappy was being Worf.
This is a good day to die!
Angus was best at imitating Data.
Please continue this petty bickering, he said.
It is most intriguing.
He raised his finger.
They’re looking for a car that went down, said Zack.
At least I know that much.
I knew it was Mayla’s car.
I also knew they were looking for Mayla.
It was a slow business.
We didn’t mean to.
He’d seen his drowned uncle.
But there was no body in the car.
We saw the sludgy water wash through and away.
The windows were all cranked down.
The doors were soon opened.
Not that he wore a blanket.
Grandma Ignatia was shaking her head at the fat Indians.
What did you do?
I bounced around on top naturally.
But that belly, yai!
I’d call out, Are you still back there?
Holler to me!
Like most fat Indians he did have a skinny butt.
Man, those muscles in his back cheeks were powerful, too.
He swung me around like a circus act.
So I enjoyed him real well, those times were good.
Awee, said Mooshum.
His voice was wistful.
But sadly they were not to last, said Grandma Ignatia.
His flagpole was still up and hard as steel.
Holler to me!
But he never did.
My, it is strange he sleeps through all of this!
He must be having a grand dream, I think.
At last I get off him.
My, he’s lasting!
I crawl around to the other end of him.
Not long, and I realize that he is not breathing.
I pat his face, but no good.
He is dead and gone, my sweet fat husband.
I mourned for that man a solid year.
Awee, said Mooshum.
A happy death.
Does it still stand up?
Not by itself, said Mooshum.
Eyyyy, said Ignatia.
If you only prayed more, she cackled.
Mooshum’s frail shoulders were shaking.
Pray for a hard-on!
That’s a good one.
Maybe I should pray to Saint Joseph.
He was a carpenter and worked with wood.
Them nuns never mentioned the patron saint of manaa!
Yes, these pants.
They are good material.
Extremely high quality.
He had sex like a rabbit.
Quick in-out-in-out but for hours at a time.
It was restful.
I felt nothing.
Then one day, something.
What happened to you?
Did it grow?
Yes, I watered it, he said between in-out-in-out.
And fertilized it.
I cried out, even louder.
What did you use?
I’m joking, woman.
I made it bigger with clay from the river.
All of a sudden I felt nothing again.
It fell off, he said.
The whole wiinag?
No, just the clay part.
He was very downhearted.
I’d give my life to make you happy.
I heard him tell his friends about it.
Mooshum’s tea spluttered from his lips.
So I was, said Mooshum.
No difficulty there, Ignatia snorted.
Were you faithful or not?
I was fateful, said Mooshum.
To a point.
said Ignatia sharply.
Oh, wait, my old friend, how could I be forgetting?
To a point!
Eyyyyy, very funny.
And you had your son with her.
I started in surprise, but neither one of them noticed.
Who was this son of Mooshum’s?
That Alvin did good for himself.
Alvin, a friend of Whitey’s!
Alvin had always seemed like part of the family.
Excuse me, I said.
Oh yes, my boy, how polite you are!
Marriageable, croaked Grandma Ignatia.
Kidding, my boy.
You could marry Angus’s sister.
But you ask a good question.
He is your quarter cousin, Mooshum said firmly.
You would defend him, but not to da dett.
That’s how he said it, da dett.
My mother didn’t, however.
So did lots of other Indians.
People parted around them.
The cake was dazzling.
Ignatia looked jealous.
Blow them out!
Make a wish!
people cried, but Mooshum seemed mesmerized by their light.
Grandma Ignatia leaned over and spoke right into his ear.
Someone brought gallons of ice cream and the party recommenced.
Once there, Clemence tried to cut away his singed locks.
Okay, I’m trying, Daddy.
But the pieces stink, you know.
She gave up.
Oh here, Joe.
You sit with him!
I sat by Mooshum, though, oblivious of these dramas.
My friends, who had promised to come, weren’t here yet.
This party would go on and on.
Part of things but able to snooze.
I sat with him as he dropped off and slept.
But when Sonja entered he snapped to like a soldier.
Her outfit must have penetrated his unconscious.
And those jeans, making her legs so long and lean.
My eyes popped.
New lizard-skin-trimmed cowboy boots!
And she wore those studs in her ears.
They trembled in the soft light.
She’d used a lot of my money again.
And those boots!
Everybody had to notice.
Sonja bent close to Mooshum.
The band was setting up out by the storage shed.
Whitey was on a morose jag now.
I saw Doe Lafournais and Cappy’s aunt Josey.
But no Zack, Angus, or Cappy.
He stayed behind.
They’re gonna meet in the graveyard at dark, said Zack.
If he would kill himself.
I couldn’t live with the if.
You’ve got to tell me what the carcass looks like.
I’ll tell you when I can, Joe.
Does Mom know he could get out?
My father waved his finger across his lips.
Not exactly, no.
But we haven’t spoken.
It would set her back, he said quickly.
His face contorted.
I have to look out for her, watch for him.
A mug shot.
He put the photograph in my hands.
It’s her call.
So don’t talk about this.
It was the customer.
The man who’d bought gas the day before I quit.
I’ve seen him before, I said.
He bought gas at Whitey’s.
Must have been just before he was picked up.
Bought gas at Whitey’s.
We heard my mother outside.
He’s studied us, said my father softly.
Knows we can’t hold him.
Thinks he can get away.
Like his uncle.
What do you mean?
You know that.
Old history, Dad.
Lark’s great-uncle was in the lynching party.
Thus, I think, the contempt.
We know the families of the men who were hanged.
We know the families of the men who hanged them.
A local historian had dredged that up and proved it.
Outside, my mother was putting away the tools.
They jangled in her bucket.
We’ll get him anyway, I said.
Won’t we, Dad.
No Mayla, I said.
I’d been playing my game.
He’d walked in.
This time he told me things.
Is it Mayla’s baby?
My father nodded.
Your mother was shown a picture.
She identified the baby.
Where is Mom now?
My father raised his brows, still surprised.
I just dropped her off at work.
As long as the baby was safe.
If she did return.
All right, my father said.
The birthday banners were all down.
The beer cans crushed.
The leaves were dried out in the arbor.
But he really didn’t tell them much.
All his real stories came at night.
I slept in Evey’s room with him.
There was a crack so deep it went down forever.
And not only that one belief, but others as well.
But people could also be falsely accused.
No one had tried the soup on Akii.
No one had consulted the old and wise.
And his mother, too.
That old buffalo woman gave Nanapush her views.
Where they abandoned, he saved.
Where they were cruel, he was kind.
Where they betrayed, he was faithful.
They will come to you.
Nanapush did not want anyone to come to him.
That will not be possible, said the buffalo woman.
Nanapush looked into his mind and saw a building.
He even saw how to make the building.
It was the round house.
The old female buffalo kept talking.
Your people were brought together by us buffalo once.
You knew how to hunt and use us.
Your clans gave you laws.
You had many rules by which you operated.
Rules that respected us and forced you to work together.
That is how it came about, said Mooshum.
Mooshum had risen at six as usual.
You go off with your own.
He waved his hand.
I’m all set here.
Clemence said I have to stay with you.
Saaah, she treats me like a puking baby.
You go off and have a good time!
He was wearing his dentures, which usually meant company.
Go on, live it up.
I didn’t take the bill.
You’re up to something, Mooshum.
Maybe I can help you, I said.
Eh, so be it.
Clemence keeps my bottle high in the kitchen cabinet.
You could fetch me that!
I stood before her.
We’re going to dig up those passbooks, I said.
All right, she said, her blue eyes soft with hurt.
Stop this talk of money.
Mooshum stumbled close to Sonja.
Took her arm.
He spoke silkily.
Get out of here now, he said to me.
He held his hand out for the bottle.
But I stood my ground.
I’m not going anywhere, I said.
Clemence told me to stay.
I followed them into the bedroom.
They stared at me in a helpless way.
I sat down on the bed.
Mooshum gave me an outraged snort.
Sonja sat down sullenly and puffed out her lips.
Her hair glowed in light from the window behind her.
Joe, she said, this is Mooshum’s birthday present.
What’s in the bag.
Well, give it to him, then.
a grown-up gift.
A grown-up gift?
Sonja made a face that meant duh.
My throat shut.
I looked from Mooshum to Sonja, back and forth.
They wouldn’t look at each other.
Heeled sandals with long leather laces.
I’m not leaving.
I sat down next to Mooshum, on his low cot.
You are too!
Sonja stared at me.
Get outta here, she ordered.
I won’t, I said.
I was mad, too, but what I said surprised me.
You’re gonna let me stay.
Because if you don’t, I’ll tell Whitey about the money.
Sonja froze and sat back down.
She was holding some shiny cloth.
She stared at me.
A remote, mystified look crept onto her face.
Really, she said.
Her voice was sad, a whisper.
I should have left, right then.
I’ve never felt all one way about what happened next.
Money again, saaah, cried Mooshum in disgust.
I grabbed Mooshum’s bottle and drank.
The whiskey hit me and my eyes watered too.
He’s a good boy, said Mooshum.
Sonja wouldn’t take her eyes off me.
You think so?
You really think he’s a good boy?
He takes good care of me.
Mooshum drank and offered me the bottle again.
I passed it to Sonja.
You’ll tell Whitey, huh?
Then she knocked back a long swallow.
Sonja narrowed her eyes until the blueness turned black.
So it’s you and Whitey.
I’m onna dress in the bathroom.
You boys stay right here.
My jaw dropped, and she laughed mean.
Can’t have it both ways, you lying little phony.
I’m not momming you anymore.
Mooshum and I sat silently on the cot.
My head started buzzing.
I took another swig from Mooshum’s bottle.
I suppose the two of us gaped at her.
Hit Play, Joe, she growled.
She drew a long wavy dagger from her sleeve.
She pushed an invisible switch.
The dagger lit up and glowed.
She teased us for a while.
The robe had slits in the sides.
One armor-plated breast would appear.
A leg in the sandal laced to her thigh.
She dropped her robes.
I grabbed Mooshum’s arm.
She was tall in those heeled sandals.
I’d never seen her exercise.
Skins and scarves flowed off her.
She wore thin vinyl gauntlets.
I almost fainted.
I grabbed Mooshum again.
He was panting with happiness.
The drums began.
Mooshum gave me the bottle.
Kicked me in the knee.
The drum fell silent.
And there they were.
I was dizzy by the time the drum quit.
Mooshum’s breath came ragged.
I could hear the tape scratch.
She threw the cone at me too.
Well, it was a rabbit pelt.
But so what.
Cupped her tasseled breasts in her hands.
Happy birthday, old man, she said.
Mooshum’s smile glowed.
Tears flowed down the grooves in his cheeks.
He did not take another.
She put her ear to his chest and listened.
I can’t hear his heart, she said.
I held on to Mooshum too.
Should we do mouth-to-mouth resuscitation?
I don’t know.
We looked down at him.
His eyes were closed.
He was smiling.
He looked the happiest I’d seen him.
He’s in a dream now, Sonja said tenderly.
Her words burst through a sob.
He’s going away.
Let’s not disturb him.
She leaned over Mooshum, smoothing his hair back and murmuring.
Maybe his heart is beating after all!
I hear a thump or two, she said, relieved.
Dazed, I watched Mooshum for signs of life.
But he did not stir.
Yes, she said.
There’s a beat.
They’re just coming really slow.
And I think he took a breath.
I wouldn’t look at her.
I’m really sorry, I said.
Sorry doesn’t cut it.
But I couldn’t care less.
You know where I’m from?
That’s a nice town, right?
Yeah, I guess.
I went to a Catholic school.
I finished eighth grade.
Know how I made it through?
My mom was a Catholic.
She went to church.
She went—she worked the boats.
Know what she did?
She went with men, Joe.
Know what that means?
I mumbled something.
That’s how I came along in the first place.
She tried to keep her own money too.
Know what that means, Joe?
She got beat up a lot.
She took drugs, too.
And guess what?
I never met my dad.
I quit school, had my baby.
I did not learn nothing.
My mom said if you got nothing, you can strip.
Just dance around, right?
Don’t do nothing more, just dance around.
I had a friend, she was doing it, making money.
I said yes, I wouldn’t do any other stuff.
Think I did something else?
I got stuck in that life.
Then I met Whitey, see.
Whitey courted me.
Followed me around the circuit.
Whitey started protecting me.
He asked me to quit.
Come live with me, he says.
I didn’t ask if he would marry me.
You know why, Joe?
I’ll tell you.
I didn’t think I was worth marrying, that’s why.
Not worth marrying.
I don’t know.
I thought .
You thought we were married.
I don’t give a rat’s ass now.
I treated you good, didn’t I?
But all along you just were itching.
You think I didn’t notice?
Yeah, I noticed, said Sonja.
Take a good look now.
I couldn’t look.
Open your frickin’ eyes.
My manager did that with a razor, Joe.
I wouldn’t take a hunting party.
Think your threats scare me?
You’re crying, aren’t you?
Cry all you want, Joe.
I don’t have a daughter anymore.
I thought of you like my son.
But you just turned into another piece a shit guy.
Another gimme-gimme asshole, Joe.
That’s all you are.
I sat with Mooshum.
My head rang like I’d been clocked.
His eyes opened and then closed.
I ran for water, and gave him a little sip.
I’m still here, he said.
His voice was faint with disappointment.
Yet I was glad I did.
The conflict in me skewed my brain.
I never told her about Sonja, not really.
How that killed me once I really thought about it.
A gimme-gimme asshole.
Maybe I was.
Cappy didn’t react.
So, aaniin .
We did everything.
Everything we could think of .
well, there might be more, but we tried .
In the graveyard.
It was the night of your Mooshum’s birthday.
On a grave?
Not right on a grave.
That’s good; it could be bad luck.
Then after, we got into the church basement.
We did it a couple of more times there.
In the catechism room.
There’s a rug.
I was silent.
My head swam.
Bold move, I said at last.
Yeah, then she left.
I can’t do nothing.
Cappy looked at me like a dying dog.
He tapped his chest and whispered.
It hurts right here.
Women, I said.
He looked at me.
They’ll kill you.
How do you know?
I didn’t answer.
By contrast, Cappy’s love was pure.
His love was just starting to manifest.
Elwin had a tattoo gun and traded for his work.
No, I said.
Don’t do that.
Thinking of her made me think of everything.
I put the thought of Mayla from my mind.
I tried also not to think of my mother.
Of what had maybe happened in Bismarck.
I wished I could change places with her.
I was holding Pearl when I heard my mother scream.
And scream again.
I stood outside, holding my bike up, leaning on it.
Pearl was next to me.
His face was yellow with exhaustion.
His eyes were so red they seemed rimmed with blood.
He turned and saw me.
They let him go, didn’t they, I said.
He didn’t answer.
Didn’t they, Dad.
After a moment he dragged on the cigarette, looked down.
All you catch are drunks and hot dog thieves.
Don’t forget the scofflaws and custody cases.
Is there anywhere you can’t park on the rez?
Try the tribal chairman’s spot.
Nothing but pain.
You said yourself.
Why do it anyway?
You know why.
No, I don’t.
Don’t leave her, Dad, please.
But he did not even glance at me to answer.
I stood awkwardly across from him, dangling my hands.
Why do you do it?
I said to him, bursting out.
You want to know?
He brought it over to the table.
Why I keep on.
You want to know?
He lifted off the pan.
I’m going to illustrate this for you, son.
These he balanced precariously on top of the other silverware.
Then sat back, stroking his chin.
That’s it, he said.
I must have looked scared.
I was scared.
His behavior was that of a madman.
That’s what, Dad?
I carefully said.
The way you’d address a person in delirium.
He rubbed his sparse gray whiskers.
That’s Indian Law.
Uh, rotten decisions?
You’ve been into my dad’s old Cohen Handbook.
He poked at the fuzzy black noodles.
Take Johnson v.
Land speculation is the stock market of the times.
Everybody’s in on it.
The land madness is unmanageable by the nascent government.
I got it then.
I pointed at the bottom of the mess.
I suppose that’s Lone Wolf v.
Now, that would be a better foundation.
He shook the fork and the stink wafted at me.
So even if .
He could not go on.
I hoped we’d clean the mess up soon, but no.
So even if I could prosecute Lark .
Okay, Dad, I said, quieted.
How come you do it?
How come you stay here?
The casserole was starting to ooze and thaw.
He had suspended Mom’s good knives carefully.
He nodded at the knives.
Solid decisions with no scattershot opinions attached.
I finally asked him what it was.
It’s a letter from her.
And I wrote one back, he said.
We were breathing hard.
I need to get a stamp, he said.
So we biked down to the post office.
Cappy put his money out and bought a stamp.
Joe, she said.
I made that banana bread you like.
That lady gave me this for you, said Cappy.
He handed me a foil-wrapped brick.
I hefted it.
I held on to it.
What is that?
He nodded at the brick in my hand.
I’m hungry, he said.
He ate the whole thing, which was a relief.
He’d redeem it with his cans.
Hey, I said.
Are you going inside?
Cappy was already halfway up the steps.
I’m going to confession, said Cappy.
Were you even baptized?
Cappy kept on going.
Of course I was.
Oh, said Angus.
Were you confirmed then?
Yeah, said Cappy.
When was your last confession?
What’s it to you?
I mean, Father will ask.
I’ll tell him.
Angus glanced at me.
Cappy seemed dead serious.
You can’t do this.
Cappy terrified me then.
He hugged me.
Look, I think I got the time wrong, he said.
Please, Cappy, let’s go swim.
No, no, you’ve got the time right, said Cappy.
He touched our shoulders.
Let’s go in.
The church was nearly empty inside.
Angus was closest to the confessional.
Cappy boldly crossed the highway and Father Travis followed.
Cappy cut through yards he knew well and disappeared.
What should we do?
Stay ready, I said.
Soon, Cappy popped across.
A moment later, Father Travis.
He knows those yards too.
We would have made it.
He would have made it.
He came so close.
Cappy floated out from under that hand.
But it came down and grabbed his back wheel.
He had confessed what we feared he would confess.
Father, this does not look good, said Angus.
Let him down, please, Father Travis.
I tried to imagine my father’s voice in this situation.
Cappy is a minor, I said.
His foot went back but Cappy rolled out of range.
We got on our bikes.
Good day, Father, said Angus.
Father Travis stared past us as we rode away.
Shit and hell, I said to Cappy later.
What were you thinking?
Everything, said Cappy.
Shit and hell.
Clemence frowned at my language.
Sorry, Auntie, I said.
Why’d you tell him?
He said notice her, not, you know.
The size of his calf muscles!
But this new one has his pride.
Want to see his thumb?
But Mooshum wanted to talk.
Listen here, you boys.
Open up, said Clemence, and filled his mouth.
But that was not how it happened, said Mooshum.
For I was there.
The Blackfeet’s eyes just glowed, said Mooshum.
The Blackfeet boy’s eyes sparked like candles at that.
His ankles, too, were bound with strong ropes.
Another rawhide at his waist fixed him to a tree.
They let their teeth rot.
Liver Eater’s teeth were no different from any trapper’s.
And now he was trying to chew off his cords.
We panicked him into chawing until he was all gum.
Never again could he bite into an Indian.
But we planned to make him helpless altogether.
This young Blackfeet and me.
Now he couldn’t shoot straight.
He would have to become a sheriff.
That is, if the Crows did not kill him.
They need their fun, I said.
He got away.
Exactly, said Clemence.
Oh, said Clemence.
Whitey says she cleared out.
Is she coming back?
Whitey told me her note said never.
She said he’d best clean up his act.
Amen to that.
She could get real far on that, he said.
He looked away, offended.
Yeah, I should have told you.
We didn’t talk for a while.
Just to make sure.
Maybe she left you some money, said Cappy.
His voice was neutral.
I offered to trade, said Cappy.
I like mine now.
I bet she left me a goddamned note.
That’s what I bet.
We both turned out to be right.
Cash is for your shoes.
Also I am leaving you saving acct.
to spend on an IV education out east.
I looked inside the passbook.
It was ten thousand.
Treat your mom good.
Some day you might deserve how good you grew up.
I can have a new life with the $.
No more of what you saw.
What the hell, I said to Cappy.
What’s she mean, what you saw?
But my tongue was stopped by obscure shame.
Nothing, I said.
Travel money, then.
He folded the bills in his hand.
After a couple miles, Cappy laughed.
I got a good one.
How come ducks don’t fly upside down?
He didn’t wait for me to answer.
They’re afraid of quacking up!
I even told them Cappy’s joke.
Linda was responsible for the existence of Linden.
My mind wouldn’t go any farther.
I wasn’t thinking about it—I couldn’t stand thinking about it.
It sold beadwork, moccasins, tobacco, and gum.
We got a grocery cart.
Dad unfolded the list.
Dried pinto beans.
We located the beans in the pasta aisle.
These are cheap.
Tomato paste, canned tomatoes—Rotel, the kind with chilies—4 cans each.
Five pounds of hamburger meat.
Lean if you can get it, the list said.
Why would she want lean?
Less grease, said my father.
I like grease.
He threw some packages into the cart.
Cumin, I read.
In the spice aisle we found cumin.
What do you think?
We looked at a pile of muskmelons.
Some had spots.
There were grapes.
All had spots.
There was a bucket of local berries and some plums.
We bought another package that contained only thighs.
What does she mean wrapped whole?
My father stopped beside me, frowning at the paper.
He held a carton of cream in one hand.
My father must have looked up just after I did.
There was a moment where all we did was stare.
As I’ve said before, my dad was somewhat clumsy.
Dad kept his chin down.
The thing was, Lark seemed to be smiling.
Like he was excited by our attack.
A pure black joy in seeing his blood filled me.
Blood and cream.
Lark kicked upward and pushed with all his might.
My father went skidding backward.
Not even a medium one.
Just a small one.
But it was a heart attack.
He strained for breath.
He looked up at me, perplexed.
When he nodded yes, everything went out of me.
I stayed with him.
They couldn’t make me leave him.
It involved inserting stents into three arteries.
He looked weak and diminished in the hospital bed.
We all sat together and talked about nothing, everything.
We had twin beds.
I would sleep on a rollaway in some corner.
There was an awkwardness; her physical presence bothered me.
She was wearing my father’s robe.
The room wasn’t cold.
It would tie us together somehow.
I needed him so much.
She gave it to me.
He purchased everything he wore at Silverman’s in Grand Forks.
He saw his shirt on me and looked quizzical.
It was Cappy.
Some members of our family paid a visit, he said.
I didn’t know what he was talking about.
They brought him around.
The Holodeck, dummy.
It was a situation like when Picard was the detective.
I was flooded, tingling with relief.
Is he dead?
No, just persuaded.
They messed him up good, man.
He won’t come around you.
Tell your mom and dad.
After the call, I was thinking how to tell them.
My mother had come back.
My mother sat down on the bed.
Whatever she heard wasn’t good.
She didn’t answer.
I remember the buzz of lights on in the bathroom.
She opened her eyes and looked at me.
Then she focused and her mouth creased in a frown.
I guess people beat him up.
That’s good, I said.
He said something to Whitey about his rich girlfriend.
He drove through, yelling, making fun of Whitey.
He got away.
Whitey chased him with a wrench.
What was he talking about?
Sonja isn’t rich.
I sat there with my mouth open.
This room’s hot, said my mother.
Let’s get the blower going.
We ate silently.
She laid it on her plate and said, No.
Still chewing, I stared at her.
Is there something wrong with that burger, Mom?
She gazed past me, transfixed by a thought.
The knife crease shot up between her eyebrows.
It’s something Daddy told me.
A story about a wiindigoo.
Lark’s trying to eat us, Joe.
I won’t let him, she said.
I will be the one to stop him.
Her determination terrified me.
My mother took a pill and fell asleep at once.
My chest opened and my stomach stopped grinding.
If my mother went after Lark, he’d kill her.
I knew this.
I counted the holes again and again.
On the day we left Fargo, I woke early.
I listened to the shower water rattle down.
A rain that washes the whitened dust-coated leaves.
A gentle rain that lasts for days.
My mother drove with the windshield wipers going.
I pushed it out.
The thought fell back.
Three times I pushed it out, each time harder.
I hummed to myself.
I thought this idea through to its conclusion.
I stood back from my thought.
I watched myself think.
The end of thinking occurred.
When we got home, Clemence had fixed the chili.
I imagined myself killing him over and over.
I decided I would join his Saturday morning catechism class.
I thought he would let me do that.
They needed to be dealt with.
I knew what I was in for.
There were Sins Crying Out to Heaven for Vengeance.
Father Travis taught like Vatican II had never happened.
Nobody looked over his shoulder way up here.
Do you have some goal in mind?
I want to be confirmed by the end of summer.
Father Travis looked me over.
What’s your rush?
It would help things.
Things at home, maybe, if I could pray.
You can pray without being confirmed.
He handed me a pamphlet.
You can use your own words, Joe.
You don’t have to be confirmed in order to pray.
Father, I have a question.
Thanks, I said to Father Travis.
I’ll see you Monday.
He nodded, his eyes thoughtful.
Yes, I’m sure you will.
He looked pallid and maybe hadn’t slept so well.
He hadn’t shaved yet.
Was there a wake down here?
Pourier’s mother died.
Which means we have probably seen the last of him.
By the way, I have a book for you.
He handed me a soft old splayed paperback of Dune.
Shall we start with the Eucharist?
I saw you at mass with Angus.
Did you understand what was happening?
I had memorized the pamphlet, so I said yes.
Can you tell me?
Communion wafers, yes.
As I wracked my mind the rain quit.
The basement was aslant with shimmering veils of light.
Uh, spiritual nutrition?
Everything out in the world is also in you.
Good, bad, evil, perfection, death, everything.
So we study our souls.
All right, I said faintly.
There’s a gopher.
He stopped and looked at me.
How’s your soul doing?
I don’t know, I said.
I’d like to shoot some gophers.
Finally, when we turned into the trees, he said, Evil.
There are types of evil, did you know that?
Disease and poverty, calamities of any natural sort.
These we can’t do anything about.
Moral evil is different.
It is caused by human beings.
That is a moral evil.
Right, I said.
Something hurt in me, shot straight through me.
I kept walking, my head down.
God can’t do that without taking away our moral freedom.
Do you see?
I went cold.
He does, said Father Travis, his voice rising a little.
In every instance, Joe.
In every heart-soaking instance.
Yes, I’ve seen it.
I admire them.
They come to the wakes.
I stopped walking.
I looked at the field, not at Father Travis.
I felt like throwing it.
Gophers were popping up and down, uttering their cheerful tweets.
We won’t be doing that, Joe, said Father Travis.
I stopped, sat back on my bike seat.
Any girls come by to watch you pump iron?
Nobody came by, said Cappy.
Nobody worth this vision.
You should get your dad to buy you some weights.
You can lift in your bedroom until you’re presentable.
Presentable like you think you are.
Is there any beer?
Better than that, said Cappy.
Hey, blood brother!
Me sparkum up, kemo sabe, said Cappy.
We decided to smoke it on the overlook.
We still had our bucket full of golf balls.
The ground was almost dry.
The ticks were mostly gone.
I held the joint too long.
Quit chiefin’ it, said Cappy.
I’d got lost in my thinking.
The weed was harsh and stale.
We drank the beer.
There was a lull after they passed.
Cappy turned to me.
It was a gesture sure to drive girls crazy.
News flies fast, I said.
Yeah, said Cappy, it sure does.
He wouldn’t let up.
he asked again.
For no reason.
Cappy looked me over.
I brooded down at the clipped green for a while.
Nah, he said again.
There’s something else.
Okay, I said.
I needed practice shooting.
Like I thought he’d let me help shoot the gophers.
But he just gave me a book.
Good will always come out of evil.
He said that?
I’m off Whitey.
You shoulda come to me.
Anytime, my brother.
I been hunting since I was two.
I got my first buck when I was nine.
I know it.
But it wasn’t just shooting gophers.
You know that.
I might know that.
You know what it is.
What I’m talking about.
I guess I do.
Big lawyer word.
Should I define it?
I’m your best friend.
I’m your number one.
I’m your number one, too.
I do it alone or I don’t do it.
Shit, I forgot about these.
They were crumpled but not torn apart.
Now he’s got matches, I said.
My brother got ’em.
I never went there.
Anyway, back to the subject.
I don’t need to know.
Shit outta luck.
I can’t let that happen to you.
Except his rifle.
I can’t use his rifle.
Just to practice.
Then Doe’s gun gets stolen while we’re gone.
While the house is empty.
We hide the gun, the ammunition.
In case he comes along.
I know he golfs, used to anyway.
Linda told me.
Everybody knows Lark golfs, which is good.
Anyone can miss a deer and hit a golfer.
My dad taught me on a .
I promise you, my boy, just go easy.
So I get my first deer on one shot.
’Cause you’re an Emperor?
No, my son, because I didn’t feel the kick.
I wasn’t worried about the kick.
I shot smooth.
Sometimes you learn on a 30.
I wish I could teach you on a .
like my dad did, but you’re ruined already.
I did feel ruined.
I was just no good at it.
I couldn’t aim straight.
Lucky you’re not an old-time Indian.
You woulda starved, said Cappy.
Maybe I need glasses.
I was discouraged.
Maybe you should close one eye.
I’m doing that.
The other eye.
Yeah, you might do better.
I hit three out of ten.
We couldn’t let anybody know I was practicing.
He couldn’t ask Doe for ammunition without explaining why.
We’ll go into the hardware and I’ll buy the ammo.
No, I said, I should go myself.
Just a figure of speech, she’d said.
Maybe Uncle Edward.
You wouldn’t want him out looking for you, would you?
So I went home.
I had the money that Sonja left me.
Thinking of Sonja was like punching a bruise.
She still thought I was taking catechism classes.
I’d need candles, maybe.
Or dress shoes to be an altar boy.
The shoes were a good touch.
Exactly like the one I’d found in the lake.
I guess it’s okay, the clerk said, giving me change.
Sins Crying Out to Heaven for Justice.
I might have murmured this aloud.
What did you say?
My mother had kept that edge.
I will be the one.
No you won’t, I thought.
We’d weighed facts and questions together.
She had quit indulging me.
Never laughed at things I did.
But I still needed her.
I had needed her to drive me to Hoopdance.
It was a childish thing, but also grown-up.
Mom, I said, why couldn’t you have lied?
Why couldn’t you have said that sack slipped?
That you knew where it happened?
It wouldn’t matter where, if you had just said where.
I wish I had lied, Joe!
But I didn’t know where it happened.
And your father knew I didn’t know.
And you knew, too.
I told you both.
How could I change my story later on?
And remember, I knew that I didn’t know, too.
What would happen to my sense of who I am?
I’m glad you would have.
She looked straight ahead.
Clearly, she was done talking.
You’re my mom.
I’d love you.
Dad would love you.
You lied to save Mayla and her baby.
You did that easy.
There was no one else who could do it.
I saw that.
I was a bad shot and I knew that.
I might not get much better.
Plus, the reality of the thing.
We fell silent again.
They were soft and spotted, but not black.
And that unbearable, doggy grin.
Are they from your mother?
No, I said, from me.
She flushed with pleasure and wonder.
They are perfect, she said.
I’ll bet you a buck she has banana bread.
You win, he said without looking up.
He was sipping water.
Reading yesterday’s Fargo Forum.
Mom walked downstairs.
She was wearing black pants and a pink T-shirt.
Her hair was fluffy and tinted to a shiny darkness.
She wore black-and-pink-beaded earrings and her feet were bare.
I saw she’d painted her toenails pink.
There was the subtle coloring of makeup—her features more dramatic.
And that light lemon lotion as she passed by.
I got close to her.
She was dressing up for Dad.
I wasn’t too dumb to figure that out.
She was looking nice to keep his spirits up.
Joe, here’s another loaf for you.
She pulled another brick from the bag.
They brag about the slightest gesture from a boy.
Or Dad would leave and I could bring up golf.
I let myself go limp and heavy.
The couch was wide, the pillows giving.
I woke an hour later.
I kept my eyes closed.
A knitted afghan had been thrown over me.
I’d kicked it off and I was cold.
Pearl rose and followed me.
A tinfoil-covered plate of food glinted on the table.
During my sleep I’d dropped my guard.
The thoughts that protected my thoughts had fallen away.
I was left with my real thoughts.
My knowledge of what I planned.
With those thoughts came fear.
I had never really been afraid before, not for myself.
And my worst terrors of loss had not materialized.
But I understood their peace was temporary.
Lark would appear again.
I had to do what I had to do.
This act was before me.
I didn’t want to blurt out the sound.
But I was naked and tiny before its power.
I had no choice.
I hadn’t known whether it would or not.
I shuffled slowly up the stairs to my bed.
Pearl had stayed by me all along.
She’d huddled next to me.
I kept her with me now.
It would pass.
She stopped and gave him a cigarette.
Of course, she knew everyone and talked to everyone.
She didn’t notice me until she sat down.
I pretended to suddenly see her.
Her eyes popped with the thrill of it.
Then sit down.
She ordered a shrimp basket.
Then without asking me, another shrimp basket.
The most expensive thing on the menu.
I tried to look trapped as I sat there.
Don’t worry, said Linda.
I won’t mind.
Geez, I said.
I didn’t mean to .
I only had enough for a pop.
Do you always get the shrimp basket?
I never do!
Linda twinkled at me.
It’s a kind of treat.
It’s a special day, Joe.
It is my birthday.
I told her happy birthday.
Could I bring him up?
Then I remembered something about the story of her birth.
Why yes, you’ve got a good memory.
But I was only physically born that day, you see.
Snow Goodchild brought our drinks.
I could hear the sizzle of our shrimps and fries.
All of a sudden I was very hungry.
I was happy that Linda was buying me lunch.
The tense prickling left my throat.
The right moment would come for questions.
What day did you pick?
The day that Betty brought you home from the hospital?
It was marked on Betty’s calendar.
She only put the most special things on her calendar.
So I knew she loved me, Joe.
That’s good, I said.
Then I didn’t know what to say.
I was stuck.
Nobody ever asked after my mother, exactly.
It wouldn’t work any better than the persuasion.
I thought that Linda might make such a comment.
But she startled me.
Listen, Joe, I’ve got to tell you this.
I am sorry that I saved my brother’s life.
I wish that he was dead.
There, I said it.
I paused a moment, and then said, Me too.
Linda nodded and looked at her hands.
Her eyes popped again.
Joe, he says he’s gonna get rich.
He says he’ll never have to work again.
I was dizzy at the thought of Sonja.
That was all in a phone message on my machine.
No, she won’t, I said.
Lark would not get to her.
These are grown-up things, said Linda.
They probably make no sense to you.
That don’t make sense to me, either.
Oh, I can never do that, said Linda.
This is the way.
I put some ketchup on my plate.
Linda nodded and tried the technique.
I didn’t know if I could take any more information.
So I said the safest thing to deflect her honesty.
Wow, it’s hot.
But she wouldn’t go to the weather with me.
Slow down, Linda, she told herself.
She laughed and dabbed her lips.
I’ve got to do this, I thought.
Okay, I said.
I get it about your brother.
Now he thinks he’ll be a rich piece of scum.
If he does play golf?
—because what if my dad wants to golf or something?
Oh, gosh, said Linda.
She looked panicked.
I never thought about that, Joe.
Because he doesn’t sleep, hardly.
Not that I know his habits anymore.
I should talk to your .
We were frozen, staring across the food.
This is something I want to do on my own.
A father-and-son thing.
Uncle Edward has golf clubs.
I’m sure he’ll let us use them.
We’ll go out there.
Just me and Dad.
It’s something I want to do.
That’s nice, Joe.
Bugger floated by the window.
He was riding my bicycle.
I have to go, I said to Linda.
Thank you, but Bugger’s stealing my bike.
I walked beside him.
Can I have my bike now?
I’ve gotta get somewhere first, he said.
I needa see if it was just a dream.
What was just a dream?
What I saw was just a dream.
I needa see.
Whatever it was, it was, I said.
You snaked out.
Can I have my bike?
A man gets hungry from all this bicycling, said Bugger.
I turned around and rode back to Cappy’s.
We always put down tobacco for those ancient rocks.
That’s why they were grandfathers.
We didn’t always get the rocks.
They took a while to find.
But this time we needed to be alone.
You should take Doe’s rifle while we’re at the powwow.
But Cappy was right.
And for sure Dad can’t leave that microphone.
So you go in, Joe.
And I really mean break in.
Leave a mess.
I’ve thought about this.
And steal a couple of other things or pretend to.
Like the TV.
I can’t carry that!
Just unplug it, knock the junk off it.
Take Randall’s boom box—no, he’ll have that—take the good toolbox.
And then the gun.
Make sure you get the right one from the closet.
I’ll show you.
I can’t bring it home, I said.
I’ll have to hide it someplace else.
My parents would expect that I’d go again this year.
I had to.
Mostly, I slept.
My mother said I must be getting my growth.
I overheard her.
Or listened in on her.
Eavesdropping was a habit now.
Of course, powwow weekend came.
Five dollars in my pocket for food.
Doe’s sisters were stout and jolly.
Doe did not come on for real until noon.
Put on your dancin’ shoes!
His announcer voice was smooth as warm maple syrup.
He loved to joke.
His jokes were friendly and awful.
No, I said, Columbus goofed up.
The real Indians are in India.
I’m a genuine Chippewa.
Chip a what?
How come you got no braids?
They got chipped off, I told him.
The old word for us is Anishinaabe, you know.
Sometimes you can’t tell a real Anishinaabe woman something.
Doe announced lost children.
Papoose on the loose!
Here’s a little boy looking for his family.
It’s just ketchup and mustard.
Cappy had danced until he was ten years old.
I’m making you a new grass dance outfit.
Josey shook her finger at him.
Cappy just smiled at her.
He never said no to anyone.
You don’t want anyone to know what you ain’t got.
Shut up, bobtail, he said to Cappy.
And don’t you even start, shrimpy, he said to me.
Randall’s eyes suddenly became impenetrable warrior eyes.
Give us your smolder, said Cappy.
That was it, said Randall.
Observe its effect.
He tried to saunter off as though it hadn’t happened.
Learn from the master, said Cappy.
Whatever Randall does, do the opposite.
I ended up talking to Margaret.
What Cappy did to attract girls was just be Cappy.
Otherwise, he just talked, and drew us all in.
How their summer was going, what their families were doing.
We went around a few times.
The girls bought cotton candy.
They peeled off strips of fluff for us.
Things started up.
It was big, contagious, defiant, joyous.
When I got to the house there was still light.
The outdoor dog barked at me and recognized me.
Hey, Fleck, I said, and he licked my hand.
We waited half an hour, behind the shed, until dusk.
She thought we were going hunting.
Up near the overlook, we’d already made the hole.
Cappy was awake.
Cappy asked me how it went.
Smooth, I said.
I think it went smooth.
Good, he said.
We lay on our backs, awake.
He’d have called the BIA/tribal police.
There wasn’t any way he’d know it was me.
But I didn’t know how I could face him anyway.
Smelling coffee, bannock, eggs, and sausage.
Outside, sun and fresh alfalfa cut for the horses.
Put another plate underneath, you.
Every bite was good.
They fried bacon and cooked bannock with the grease.
Their scrambled eggs were light, fluffy, never burnt.
Bread was toasted on the hot griddle.
There was a open jar of Juneberry jam.
Another of wild plum.
They knew how to feed boys.
Nothing could disturb them.
Grandly, gracefully, they entered the flow of the dancers.
Their buckskin fringe swayed with dreamlike precision.
Suzette and Josey did not falter.
Two skins for each dress, said Cappy.
And probably another skin’s worth of fringe.
C’mon down, all you spectators, called Doe, this is intertribal!
What are those?
Birkenstocks, somebody tells me.
We found a Birkenstock outside of Randall’s tent last night.
Fuck, said Randall, behind us.
They get anything else?
Nah, said Randall.
That rifle shows up, I’ll coldcock somebody.
How’s Doe taking it?
He’s mad, Randall shrugged, but not that mad.
He says it’s odd they just took that one rifle.
Couldn’t find any tracks or nothing.
Yeah, said Cappy.
Yeah, I said.
Randall made a disgusted noise.
Wasn’t his favorite rifle anyway.
If they got his favorite, he’d be mad.
That’s good, I said.
I’m going home tonight, said Randall.
Don’t shoot your nuts off, said Cappy.
Don’t worry, nutless.
Fuckers show up to finish the job, they’ll be sorry.
You’re the man, said Cappy.
He clapped his brother’s shoulder and we sauntered off.
We walked around and around the arena.
After a while he clapped my shoulder too.
You did it smooth.
I hate myself though.
Brother, you must get over that, said Cappy.
Listen, Cappy, I said, hoarse, nearly whispering.
I’m going to call this like it is.
Murder, for justice maybe.
Murder just the same.
But there it is.
And I can take him.
Okay, you said it.
But that’s not the whole point.
I’ll get close to him.
He’ll see you.
Worse, you’ll see him.
You’ve got one chance, Joe.
I’ll just be there to steady your mind, your aim.
I won’t get implicated, Joe.
Okay, I said out loud.
No way, I thought.
I would just go there and do it.
So just after sunrise I rose and sneaked downstairs.
I wore a brown plaid shirt over a green T-shirt.
The best I could do for camouflage.
My fingers shook.
I tried deep breaths.
I put the jar of water next to me.
Then I waited.
There were many variables.
My stomach had stopped jumping.
Done for the day, I felt almost euphoric.
I made her laugh.
I ate and ate.
I’d have to do the same thing tomorrow morning.
And I did.
I would get up to leave, thinking I was crazy.
My hand on her hair.
I thought of other things.
Then I was ready.
But he did not show up that Tuesday.
He did not show up on Wednesday either.
I went anyway.
The water beside me.
He disappeared behind the planted pines.
I thumbed off safety.
I gulped in air and let it out explosively.
But each breath got stuck.
And there was Lark.
He hit from a low rise near the pine trees.
Lark walked down quickly.
He’d tap it in, I thought.
He’d bend over to scoop it out.
When he straightened up I’d shoot.
There was a loud silence.
I lowered the rifle.
I got the rifle back to my shoulder, reloaded.
I couldn’t tell where that shot went.
Lark pitched forward.
There was another silence.
My face was drenching wet.
I wiped my eyes on my sleeve.
Lark began to make noise again.
Please, no, please, no.
Lark was trying to get up again.
He locked eyes with me.
Their blackness knocked me backward.
The rifle was lifted from my arms.
Cappy stepped forward beside me.
I didn’t hear the shot.
All sound, all motion, had stalled in the sullen air.
My brain was ringing.
C’mon, he said, touching my arm.
I followed him uphill in the first drops of rain.
At the oak tree, we turned and looked down.
His putter cast down at his heels.
He hadn’t moved.
Beside me, Cappy dropped to his knees.
After a while, he lifted his head and shook it.
Nobody’s home at my place, said Cappy.
We gotta hide this.
He had the rifle.
Now the rain was misting down.
I don’t know why I didn’t think of this.
I don’t know why I didn’t either, said Cappy.
It had a black driver’s-side door and a cracked windshield.
The starter’s bad, said Cappy.
It groaned the first time he turned it over.
He gave it a spurt of gas.
You gotta sneak up on it, Cappy said.
I know where we’re going.
He tried again.
It nearly caught.
Where are we going?
To the old Wishkob homestead.
That makes weird sense, said Cappy.
Engage, he said.
The engine roared.
The rain was coming down like sixty now.
He drove slowly and sedately as an old man.
We got back in the car and pulled out.
We didn’t talk.
He’s dead for sure, said Cappy.
Otherwise, they’d rocket.
Their sirens would be going off.
We sat in the idling car.
The rain was hardly a sprinkle now.
You saved my ass, brother.
He would’ve died though, I said.
You didn’t kill him.
This is not on you.
We were speaking without emotion.
Like we were talking of other people.
But I was choking up.
We can’t talk about it after this, he said.
Isn’t that how your dad says people get caught?
Bragging to their friends?
They get drunk, whatever.
I feel like getting drunk, Cappy said.
I don’t know.
Randall’s on the wagon.
I could make it up with Whitey, I said.
Cappy glanced at me.
I nodded at him and looked away.
After you bring the car back .
Meet me at the gas station.
I’ll go talk to him.
I got out.
Came out dangling two cold open bottles of grape Crush.
I walked up to him and took a bottle.
His receiver was crackling police signals.
Your stomach must be turned over, said Whitey.
You need a slice a bread.
Your mom sure hated that, said Whitey.
Fancy a rez steak sandwich?
Not yet, I said.
I sipped the grape pop.
This time it went down good, said Whitey.
He was looking at me closely.
Someone dusted Lark, he said.
On the golf course.
Then one clean head shot.
I tried to sit very still, but couldn’t.
I jumped up and ran around back.
I just got there in time.
Whitey didn’t follow me.
He was helping a customer when I came back.
I’m switchin’ you to ginger ale, my boy.
I think I got the summer flu.
The summer flu, he agreed.
It’s going around.
Your friends catch it too?
I don’t know.
I haven’t seen ’em.
Whitey nodded and sat down beside me.
I been listening to the squawk-box.
Whoever did it left no traces, he said.
There’s nothing to go on.
Nobody seen it.
Nobody seen nothin’.
Then it rained so hard.
You’ll be getting over this flu quickly.
Still, maybe you should take a lay-down, Joe.
There’s a little cot in the office.
Sonja used to nap there, and she will again.
She’s coming home, Joe.
I tell you?
Did she call you?
I asked, hating him.
Damn right, she called me.
Gonna be different now, she said, her game.
But I don’t care.
I don’t care.
She’s coming back to me, Joe.
It didn’t smell like Sonja.
I was glad because I couldn’t have taken that.
I could maybe eat that sandwich now, Uncle.
I’m on a health kick, me.
He handed over the sandwich and made one for himself.
Then he gave me that one too.
Your friend’s here.
Uncle, I said, we could use a little something.
He ate his whole sandwich.
I don’t wonder, he said when it was gone.
Plus any future supply of stuff for you.
His face was expressionless.
Handle the trade, said Whitey.
There was no one in sight.
Cappy took the bottle and put it underneath his shirt.
A customer pulled up.
Whitey waved and walked over to the car.
Does he know?
I think so, I said.
I puked when he told me about Lark.
I puked riding over here, said Cappy.
It’s just the summer flu, I said.
Is that a medical opinion, Joe?
Our faces fell into our real expressions.
What are we?
What are we now?
I don’t know, man.
I don’t know.
Let’s sterilize our insides.
We sat down on the blocks and opened the bottle.
Cappy took a cautious drink, then handed it to me.
I took a fiery mouthful and let it trickle down.
After the next sip I felt better.
Everything looked amber.
I took my first deep breath.
Oh, oh, oh.
He drank more deeply.
Then we lay down in the weeds.
Brother, I said, what made you come to the overlook?
I was always there, said Cappy.
I always had your back.
I thought so, I said.
And then we slept.
Gimme your shirt, Joe, he said.
Leave it here.
Touch the bottle again.
You, too, Cappy.
I gave him my shirt and walked home.
Cappy coasted beside me.
We did not feel particularly drunk.
We did not feel anything.
We’ll keep training for cross-country in the morning.
Where were you?
asked my mother.
At Whitey’s, too.
Some small thing eased between them.
Just hanging around.
Whitey fed us lunch.
Me and Cappy.
All I had to do was stay plausible.
Sit down, son, said my father.
He told me Lark was dead.
I let all my feelings cross my face.
That’s good, I finally said.
He was murdered, Joe.
But I’d used the word before.
I’d hardened myself.
I wanted him dead, okay?
In my thoughts.
If you’re telling me he’s murdered, then I’m happy.
He deserved it.
Mom is free now.
The guy who killed him should get a medal.
All right, my father said.
He pushed back his chair.
My mother’s eyes did not leave my face.
She was intent on believing anything I said.
But she shuddered all over, suddenly.
A ripple passed over her body.
The shock of it reached me.
She sees the murderer in me, I thought.
I sat back up.
I won’t lie.
I’m glad he’s dead.
Can I go now?
I carefully took the steps.
I’ve done what I had to do.
There is no going back.
And whatever happens, I can take.
I was down.
Whitey vouched for us.
But the rifle.
I could feel nothing, but my thoughts ran wild.
How tough those roots had clung.
Ideas too, I muttered.
Dad’s case law, the Cohen, and then that hot dish.
I’d think of the black noodles.
Would I become a wiindigoo?
Infected by Lark?
I had known nothing even as the evil was occurring.
I hadn’t been touched yet.
Thinking finally exhausted me.
I turned over, away from the light, and slept.
Dad, I said, once, when he came into the room.
Does Linda know?
Is she okay?
He’d brought me a glass of Whitey’s cure—warm ginger ale.
I don’t know, he said.
She won’t pick up her telephone.
She’s not at work.
I’ve got to get to her, I thought.
When I woke from that sleep everything was clear.
I had no fever, no sickness at all.
I was hungry.
I got up and took a shower.
Put fresh clothes on and came downstairs.
Sat back on her heels.
That’s why I did it, I thought.
And I was satisfied right then.
So she could give her colander a shake.
I poured out a bowl of cereal and added milk.
I ate it slowly.
The cereal felt good going down.
I rinsed my bowl and went outside.
My mother got up and walked over to me.
She put her stained palm on my forehead.
Your fever’s gone.
I’m fine now!
I won’t do much, I said.
It’s just that school starts up in two weeks.
I don’t want to waste any of my last days.
She wasn’t angry, but she didn’t smile.
I didn’t mean it that way, I said.
I’ll come back early.
She pushed back my hair.
I’d left the jar on the hill.
She turned around.
Vince Madwesin came by.
He said he likes my home-canned pickles.
I guess it’s a hint.
I am worried over you, Joe.
Her standing before me in the riot of growth.
Whitey said you boys got drunk.
I wasted good vacation being sick, Mom.
I think my drinking days are done.
I looked down at my feet.
Are you okay now?
I asked, low.
Oh sure, my boy.
I’m really good; I’m back to myself.
Everything is fine now, fine.
She tried to persuade me.
At least he’s dead, Mom.
He paid, whatever else.
But then I’d have to say it was me.
I couldn’t look at her and got on my bike.
First, I rode over to the post office.
She was not.
As far as Mrs.
Nanapush knew, she was at home.
So I went there.
I was weak enough to feel that ride as endless.
Linda’s car was parked in a wooden carport.
She drove, surprising to say, a cute blue Mustang.
I leaned my bike against her porch.
She appeared behind it.
You snuck up on me!
She touched the screen, frowning at it.
I’ve gotta fix this.
Come in, Joe.
Her dog started barking, too late.
Buster, smile, said Linda.
It was true.
Linda let him in with me.
Sit down, Joe.
What can I get you?
She listed everything she had.
Every kind of drink and sandwich possibility.
I didn’t stop her.
I said that sounded good.
Or books that had gotten off the shelves.
Not everything was put away immediately.
There might be a jacket draped over a chair.
Our shoes weren’t lined up by the door.
Everything had a double, though not an identical.
They were mostly historical romances.
I had the creeps and we hadn’t even talked.
At least it was the only table.
There was not another almost like it.
She poured some iced tea.
The bread was toasted crisp.
There was an extra plate.
I pointed at it.
What’s it for?
There was a crust of bread on the plate.
Spirits don’t eat much?
Not this one, said Linda comfortably.
And suddenly it all seemed okay by me.
I was hungry the way you get after an illness.
Linda munched away, beaming at me, then at the sandwich.
I don’t know, but you sure taste good.
The other sandwich made a lump in my throat.
Wash it down with some tea?
I took off work for other reasons.
Wait, said Linda.
She apologized for being a bad hostess.
The golf course, she said.
You pumped me for information.
She wagged her finger at me.
Two and two makes three.
Maybe you’re not, but I’ve decided you are.
But someone nearsighted, not your father.
Your father is a very good shot.
This was of course a big surprise to me.
Everybody knows that.
Kids don’t know their parents’ history.
What did you come here for?
Can I trust you?
If you have to ask me that?
I was stuck.
She seemed about to explode with laughter.
I would do anything in the world for your family.
I am devoted to you guys.
What is it?
Why did he do it?
I caught her off guard.
Her eyes bulged and filled.
But she answered.
He hated your family, I mean, your father mostly.
But Whitey and Sonja too.
His thinking was all crooked, Joe.
He hated your father but he was afraid of him.
A high-school girl.
Won’t go with him.
Probably hates him, scared of him.
All this eats at him.
He idolized Yeltow.
Or maybe he’d blackmail Yeltow.
I could see him doing either.
And of course your mother wouldn’t give him that file.
I knew that someday he would let it loose.
It would lurch out with part of me inside.
I was part of the monster too.
I gave and gave, but know what?
It was still hungry.
There was always something it needed.
Something missing in his mother, too.
I’ll tell you what it was: me.
My powerful spirit.
All those years later.
Call me and say, Hello, it’s your mother.
I was silent.
And he could not let go, she said at last.
He was nervous about Mayla.
I just know she’s somewhere on the reservation.
Do you think she’s alive?
After a while, dread stole into me.
I asked, Am I like him?
No, she said.
This’ll get to you.
Or whoever, I mean.
This could wreck you.
Don’t let it wreck you, Joe.
What could you do?
Or whoever do?
But me, that’s another story.
It’s me who is not so different, Joe.
Yeah, it’s about that rifle, I said.
It’s under your porch.
Can you hide it?
Get it off the reservation?
Buster found it already, Joe.
He knows when anything new enters his territory.
I thought he was interested in a skunk.
She saw my shock.
Don’t worry, Joe.
Want to know where I’ve been on my sick leave?
To Pierre, to my brother Cedric’s.
We threw a couple of pieces in the Missouri.
Her eyes clouded, her look gentled.
How is she?
She was out in the garden, picking bush beans.
I’ll come see her.
I want you to give her this.
When she opened it a small black screw fell out.
Tell her she can keep this in her jewelry box.
Or bury it.
Whatever she likes.
I put the screw in my pocket.
I fished it out and winged it into the ditch.
We were drinking at the edge of the construction site.
We had no idea what was going to be built.
There was always the same amount of dirt.
A federal project, said Zack.
The light was turning gold.
This here is my favorite time of day, he said.
Ssshhh, they’re communicating, Angus said.
It’s a beautiful love, I said.
I buried the puke with dirt.
I mumbled, I wouldn’t mind a beautiful love.
Cappy handed me a pamphlet.
Her last letter, man.
It was about the Rapture.
This was in it.
Cappy smiled upward.
Rapture, yeah man, said Zack.
Not that kind of rapture, said Cappy.
It’s a mass liftoff.
There’s only a certain number of people who can go.
Stairway to heaven, laughed Zack.
Raptured as one, I said.
You guys can’t get in now with that mortal stain.
It was like an icicle jabbed into my thoughts.
The subject hadn’t come up with the four of us.
We hadn’t spoken of Lark’s death.
The cold spread.
Starboy, said Cappy, holding out his hand.
Angus clasped it in a brother shake.
The truth is, none of us will get there.
They only take you stone-cold sober.
All your life?
All your life, Starboy, said Cappy.
You cannot slip even one time.
Ah, said Angus, we’re screwed.
My whole family is screwed.
We don’t need no rapture, Zack said.
We got confession.
Tell your sins to Father and you’re wiped clean.
I did that, said Cappy.
Father tried to clock me.
Then we fell silent and watched the flickering leaves.
Zelia probably confessed at home, Cappy said after a while.
Zelia probably got wiped clean.
Unless she got pregnant.
If only I hadn’t, said Cappy.
If only she was.
We would have to get married then.
You’re thirteen, I remembered.
Zelia said so were Romeo and Juliet.
I hate that movie, said Zack.
Angus was asleep, his breath whining evenly as a cicada.
My voice again.
But the others were sleeping.
I stood up after a time because someone was moaning.
It was Cappy.
I watched over him until he seemed more peaceful.
I woke up, alert, and walked in the kitchen door.
Where you been?
Mom called from the other room.
Out biking around, I said.
You missed dinner.
I can warm up some spaghetti.
Mom came in and shooed me aside.
At least can you put it on a plate?
Joe, have you been smoking?
You stink like cigarettes.
The other guys were.
Same old line I gave my folks.
I like spaghetti cold.
I won’t anymore, I promise.
She sat down watching me eat.
There’s something I wanted to tell you this morning, Joe.
You called out in your sleep last night.
I got up and I went to your door.
You were talking to Cappy.
What’d I say?
I couldn’t make out what you said.
But you called Cappy’s name twice.
I kept eating.
He’s my best buddy, Mom.
He’s like a brother to me.
I wanted to leave our house, find Cappy again.
I felt that I should not have left him sleeping.
My mother gave him a glass of water.
He was neatly shaven, never in his bathrobe anymore.
He kept reduced hours at work.
I started today, Joe.
I was still distracted.
We’d be together in the dark.
My father kept on talking.
I started my walking regimen, around the high-school track.
I made it a half mile.
I’ll be going every day.
You’ll be out running too.
I guess you’ll lap me a few times.
My mother reached out and took his hand.
I had stopped them from living in the fear cloud.
Me and Cappy.
I stubbed my foot sullenly against the table leg.
Something’s fighting in me, Joe, my father said.
My foot stopped kicking.
Maybe you’ll understand if I talk to you about it?
I didn’t want to listen.
I feel relief at Lark’s death, my father said.
We can go on now, can’t we?
Yeah, I said.
I tried to get up, but he spoke.
Yet the question of who killed Lark must be asked.
Unevenly applied, Dad.
But he got what he deserved.
My voice was flat.
My heart sickly pounding.
My mother had dropped my father’s hand.
She did not want to listen to us argue.
I feel that way too, said my father.
Bjerke will interview us tomorrow—it’s routine.
But nothing is routine.
Here is my fight, Joe.
But I’ve decided that I would do nothing.
I would offer up no information.
It was no lynching.
There was no question of his guilt.
He may have even wanted to get caught and punished.
We can’t know his mind.
It settles a legal enigma.
His death was the exit.
I would say nothing, do nothing, to muddy the resolution.
I felt my mother’s attention on me keenly.
I just wanted you to know that, my father prodded.
Lots of people had it in for Lark, I said.
I looked from one of my parents to the other.
The scuffed brown leather.
Shakespeare in sober dark red and the essays of Montaigne.
So if you hear anything, Joe, said my father.
If I hear anything, yeah, Dad.
He’d gotten my attention.
Neither was Cappy.
Every night he came after us in dreams.
That terrible contact.
Then the gunshot.
At that moment, we exchange selves.
Lark is in my body, watching.
I am in his body, dying.
And I know he’s the police.
As always I woke shouting Cappy’s name.
I lay back in the covers.
My heart was jumping.
I need medicine, I said out loud, meaning Ojibwe medicine.
The only other medicine person I knew was Grandma Thunder.
Maybe we could ask her what to do.
Just get advice about these dreams.
Something about a dream.
I sat up.
What had he seen?
But I’d never asked him what he saw.
I finally went to the post office.
He’s in the hospital, said Linda.
she called back to Mrs.
Nanapush, sorting letters.
He busted his foot stealing a case of beer.
Dropped it on his foot.
I rode over to the hospital to visit Bugger.
He was in a room with three other men.
He was glad to see me.
Did you bring me a drop?
No, I said.
His avid face fell into a pout.
I came to ask you something.
Not even a little flower arrangement, he grumped.
Or a pancake.
You want a pancake?
I been seeing pancakes.
Pancakes are the only good thing I see.
But they just feed an old man the damn oatmeal.
Coffee and oatmeal.
It’s a plain breakfast.
Not even toast?
Bugger looked at me fiercely.
I am holding out for pancakes!
I have to ask you something.
Ask away then.
I’ll give you the answer for a pancake.
He leaned forward secretively.
Keep the bottle in your shirt.
Bugger sat back, ready, his face expectant.
Remember when you took my bike?
His face turned blank.
You were sitting outside Mighty Al’s.
You saw my bike.
You got on my bike and started riding.
I came out and asked where you were going.
Bugger’s face lighted up.
He stared at something between us on the bedcover.
He began to sob in dry wrenches.
He kept crying about her.
He mumbled about construction and I knew.
I couldn’t help the picture from forming.
I stood up, jolted.
He had seen her dead body.
I couldn’t tell anyone.
Even I didn’t want to know what I knew.
The best thing for me to do was forget.
I needed to find Cappy.
Not to tell him.
I never would tell him.
I’d never tell anyone.
I would somehow find the means to get drunk.
The world would take on that amber tone.
Things would soften to brown as if in old photographs.
I would be safe.
He should’ve come out by now, said Zack.
His hair was flung down over his face.
Just held out a piece of paper.
My wife found the package of letters Zelia was hiding.
You have stolen our daughter’s innocence and wracked our life.
Cappy’s arms and legs were splayed out, limp and despairing.
I sat down beside him on a cardboard box.
There was nothing to say about anything at all.
I put my head in my hands.
Yeah, said Cappy wildly.
I bet they’re keeping her locked up until they move.
So she can’t go over to the post office.
Wrack their lives!
I’ll wrack their lives?
By loving their daughter with a true love?
Look at me, brother, he begged.
Look at me.
Would I wreck her life?
The Creator made us for each other.
Space was put between us by human error.
But our hearts listened to divine will.
Our bodies, too.
So fucking what?
Every bit of what we did was made in heaven.
The Creator is goodness, brother.
In his mysterious mercy he gave me Zelia.
That’s what her parents are asking me to do.
But I won’t do it.
I will not throw our love back in God’s face.
Nothing they do can get between us.
Yeah, said Cappy.
His hair flopped down again.
I’m going home to get that bus money, said Cappy.
And then I’m gassing up Randall’s car.
I’ll come and get you at your house.
Where are we going?
I can’t sit still, Joe.
I can’t stay here.
My place was empty.
I took a jacket.
I ate one and drank some milk.
He still did not come.
I remembered how hard it was to start Randall’s car.
Engage, I thought.
Pearl followed me around.
I went into my father’s office.
In the drawer was a manila file folder.
It was filled with greasy Xeroxes.
There was the copy of a tribal enrollment form.
On the form it said Mayla Wolfskin.
I’d call them.
I imagined writing: ask Bugger Pourier about his dream.
But I didn’t.
There was some noise outside.
It was Angus and Zack.
I’ve got something, Angus said.
He showed me an ID.
Don’t you think it looks like Cappy though?
He could buy for us.
It looks like him enough, I said.
Where we going?
Montana, Cappy said.
She wouldn’t take her eyes off me.
Skimming along the rim of the universe.
Zack had brought his guitar.
That’s when Zack got his ear scorched off.
We ate the sandwiches.
The engine turned over and we war-whooped, high and fine.
So it seemed that time stopped.
We rolled effortlessly in a dream.
I told him everything on the enrollment form.
I told him about the governor of South Dakota.
So that’s where the money came from, he said.
LaRose told me.
Linda knew it too.
That’s where Yeltow got to her.
And Lark, he kept the secret, but he was jealous.
Thought he owned her.
The governor gave her money to keep her mouth shut.
Start a new life?
Safe from Lark.
There’s still that file with his name on it.
So why not?
She was jailbait, Mayla.
He’ll go down for sure, I said then.
But Yeltow never did.
Hinsdale went by.
Sleeping Buffalo, too.
We’d turn south far ahead at Havre.
We’d traced our route on the gas station map.
Let’s keep going, said Cappy.
I feel good.
Let’s drive all night.
Make it so.
The air was cool and green with sage.
I crawled in back.
There was an old horse blanket that smelled of dust.
I slipped away easily.
I had the sense of a vast and violent motion.
Before I could grasp its significance, all was still.
I nearly fell back asleep thinking we had stopped.
I called for Cappy, but there was no answer.
I unbuckled myself and crept out the open door.
My brain clicked on.
I searched the car—empty.
One headlight flickered.
But it was only shadow.
The deepest shadow I have ever known.
I felt my way through invisible grass.
I sat in the police station, attached to the chair.
Zack and Angus were in the Havre hospital.
The ghost had brought me here.
He shook me lightly.
I slept and woke in the chair.
I must have eaten, drunk water, too.
None of it do I remember.
I was broken and fragile.
My shoes were lost in the accident.
I walked between them, stumbled.
My mother took my hand.
There was a pillow and the same old quilt.
I sat in the front with my father.
He started the engine.
We pulled out just like that and started driving home.
I knew that they knew everything.
The sentence was to endure.
Nobody shed tears and there was no anger.
But we did not stop this time.
We just kept going.
Indian Health Service, Sisseton, South Dakota; Angela Erdrich, M.
Indian Health Board, Minneapolis; Sandeep Patel, M.
Indian Health Service, Belcourt, North Dakota; Walter R.
She kept the family together.
Nenaa’ikiizhikok brought laughter and courage.
for exclusive information on your favorite HarperCollins authors.
This book is a work of fiction.
THE ROUND HOUSE.
Copyright © 2012 by Louise Erdrich.
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions.
Australia HarperCollins Publishers Australia Pty.
New Zealand HarperCollins Publishers New Zealand Limited P.
United Kingdom HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
United States HarperCollins Publishers Inc.